1997 American romantic disaster film directed by James Cameron
 

TitanicTheatrical release posterDirected byJames CameronProduced by
James Cameron
Jon Landau
Written byJames CameronStarring
Leonardo DiCaprio
Kate Winslet
Billy Zane
Kathy Bates
Frances Fisher
Bernard Hill
Jonathan Hyde
Danny Nucci
David Warner
Bill Paxton
Music byJames HornerCinematographyRussell CarpenterEdited by
Conrad Buff
James Cameron
Richard A. Harris
Productioncompany 
Paramount Pictures[1][2]
20th Century Fox[1][2]
Lightstorm Entertainment[1]
  Distributed by
Paramount Pictures(North America)
20th Century Fox(International)
Release date
November 1, 1997 (1997-11-01) (Tokyo)
December 19, 1997 (1997-12-19) (United States)
Running time195 minutes[3]CountryUnited StatesLanguageEnglishBudget$200 million[4][5][6]Box office$2.187 billion[7]
Titanic is a 1997 American epic romance and disaster film directed, written, co-produced and co-edited by James Cameron. A fictionalized account of the sinking of the RMS Titanic, it stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard the ship during its ill-fated maiden voyage.
Cameron's inspiration for the film came from his fascination with shipwrecks; he felt a love story interspersed with the human loss would be essential to convey the emotional impact of the disaster. Production began in 1995, when Cameron shot footage of the actual Titanic wreck. The modern scenes on the research vessel were shot on board the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh, which Cameron had used as a base when filming the wreck. Scale models, computer-generated imagery, and a reconstruction of the Titanic built at Baja Studios were used to re-create the sinking. The film was partially funded by Paramount Pictures and 20th Century Fox; the former handled distribution in North America while Fox released the film internationally. It was the most expensive film ever made at the time, with a production budget of $200 million.
Upon its release on December 19, 1997, Titanic achieved critical and commercial success. Nominated for 14 Academy Awards, it tied All About Eve (1950) for the most Oscar nominations, and won 11, including the awards for Best Picture and Best Director, tying Ben-Hur (1959) for the most Oscars won by a single film. With an initial worldwide gross of over $1.84 billion, Titanic was the first film to reach the billion-dollar mark. It remained the highest-grossing film of all time until Cameron's Avatar surpassed it in 2010. A 3D version of Titanic, released on April 4, 2012, to commemorate the centennial of the sinking, earned it an additional $343.6 million worldwide, pushing the film's worldwide total to $2.18 billion and making it the second film to gross more than $2 billion worldwide (after Avatar). In 2017, the film was re-released for its 20th anniversary and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.

Contents

1 Plot
2 Cast

2.1 Fictional characters
2.2 Historical characters
2.3 Cameos


3 Pre-production

3.1 Writing and inspiration
3.2 Scale modeling


4 Production
5 Post-production

5.1 Effects
5.2 Editing
5.3 Music and soundtrack


6 Release

6.1 Initial screening
6.2 Box office

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run
6.2.2 Commercial analysis


6.3 Critical reception
6.4 Accolades
6.5 Home media
6.6 3D conversion


7 Titanic Live
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 Further reading
12 External links



Plot[edit]
In 1996, treasure hunter Brock Lovett and his team aboard the research vessel Akademik Mstislav Keldysh search the wreck of RMS Titanic for a necklace with a rare diamond, the Heart of the Ocean. They recover a safe containing a drawing of a young woman wearing only the necklace dated April 14, 1912, the day the ship struck the iceberg.[Note 1] Rose Dawson Calvert, the woman in the drawing, is brought aboard Keldysh and tells Lovett of her experiences aboard Titanic.
In 1912 Southampton, 17-year-old first-class passenger Rose DeWitt Bukater, her fiancé Cal Hockley, and her mother Ruth board the luxurious Titanic. Ruth emphasizes that Rose's marriage will resolve their family's financial problems and retain their high-class persona. Distraught over the engagement, Rose considers suicide by jumping from the stern; Jack Dawson, a penniless artist, intervenes and discourages her. Discovered with Jack, Rose tells a concerned Cal that she was peering over the edge and Jack saved her from falling. When Cal becomes indifferent, she suggests to him that Jack deserves a reward. He invites Jack to dine with them in first class the following night. Jack and Rose develop a tentative friendship, despite Cal and Ruth being wary of him. Following dinner, Rose secretly joins Jack at a party in third class.
Aware of Cal and Ruth's disapproval, Rose rebuffs Jack's advances, but realizes she prefers him over Cal. After rendezvousing on the bow at sunset, Rose takes Jack to her state room; at her request, Jack sketches Rose posing nude wearing Cal's engagement present, the Heart of the Ocean necklace. They evade Cal's bodyguard, Mr. Lovejoy, and have sex in an automobile inside the cargo hold. On the forward deck, they witness a collision with an iceberg and overhear the officers and designer discussing its seriousness.
Cal discovers Jack's sketch of Rose and an insulting note from her in his safe along with the necklace. When Jack and Rose attempt to inform Cal of the collision, Lovejoy slips the necklace into Jack's pocket and he and Cal accuse him of theft. Jack is arrested, taken to the master-at-arms' office, and handcuffed to a pipe. Cal puts the necklace in his own coat pocket.
With the ship sinking, Rose flees Cal and her mother, who has boarded a lifeboat, and frees Jack. On the boat deck, Cal and Jack encourage her to board a lifeboat; Cal claims he can get himself and Jack off safely. After Rose boards one, Cal tells Jack the arrangement is only for himself. As her boat lowers, Rose decides that she cannot leave Jack and jumps back on board. Cal takes his bodyguard's pistol and chases Rose and Jack into the flooding first-class dining saloon. After using up his ammunition, Cal realizes he gave his coat and consequently the necklace to Rose. He later boards a collapsible lifeboat by carrying a lost child.
After braving several obstacles, Jack and Rose return to the boat deck. The lifeboats have departed and passengers are falling to their deaths as the stern rises out of the water. The ship breaks in half, lifting the stern into the air. Jack and Rose ride it into the ocean and he helps her onto a wooden panel buoyant enough for only one person. He assures her that she will die an old woman, warm in her bed. Jack dies of hypothermia[8] but Rose is saved.
With Rose hiding from Cal en route, the RMS Carpathia takes the survivors to New York City where Rose gives her name as Rose Dawson. Rose says she later read that Cal committed suicide after losing all his money in the Wall Street Crash of 1929.
Back in the present, Lovett decides to abandon his search after hearing Rose's story. Alone on the stern of Keldysh, Rose takes out the Heart of the Ocean – in her possession all along – and drops it into the sea over the wreck site. While she is seemingly asleep or has died in her bed,[9] photos on her dresser depict a life of freedom and adventure inspired by the life she wanted to live with Jack. A young Rose reunites with Jack at the Titanic's Grand Staircase, applauded by those who died on the ship.

Cast[edit]
Fictional characters[edit]
.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinner{display:flex;flex-direction:column}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trow{display:flex;flex-direction:row;clear:left;flex-wrap:wrap;width:100%;box-sizing:border-box}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{margin:1px;float:left}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .theader{clear:both;font-weight:bold;text-align:center;align-self:center;background-color:transparent;width:100%}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaption{text-align:left;background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-left{text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-right{text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-center{text-align:center}@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinner{width:100%!important;box-sizing:border-box;max-width:none!important;align-items:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trow{justify-content:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{float:none!important;max-width:100%!important;box-sizing:border-box;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaption{text-align:center}}Leonardo DiCaprio (top, pictured in 2014), who portrayed Jack Dawson, and Kate Winslet (pictured in 2011), who portrayed Rose DeWitt Bukater.
Leonardo DiCaprio as Jack Dawson: Cameron said he needed the cast to feel as though they were really on the Titanic, to relive its liveliness, and "to take that energy and give it to Jack, ... an artist who is able to have his heart soar".[10] Jack is portrayed as an itinerant, poor orphan from Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin, who has toured numerous places in the world, including Paris. He wins two tickets onto the RMS Titanic in a poker game and travels as a third-class passenger with his friend Fabrizio. He is attracted to Rose at first sight and meets her when she contemplates throwing herself off the stern of the ship. Her fiancé's "reward", an invitation to dine with them the next evening, enables Jack to mix with the first-class passengers for a night. When casting the role, various established actors, including Matthew McConaughey, Chris O'Donnell, Billy Crudup, and Stephen Dorff, were considered, but Cameron felt that a few of the actors were too old for the part of a 20-year-old.[11][12][13][14] Tom Cruise was interested in portraying the character, but his asking price was too much for the studio to consider.[12] Cameron considered Jared Leto for the role, but Leto refused to audition.[15] DiCaprio, 21 years old at the time, was brought to Cameron's attention by casting director Mali Finn.[11] Initially, he did not want to portray the character and refused to read his first romantic scene on the set (see below). Cameron said, "He read it once, then started goofing around, and I could never get him to focus on it again. But for one split second, a shaft of light came down from the heavens and lit up the forest." Cameron strongly believed in DiCaprio's acting ability and told him, "Look, I'm not going to make this guy brooding and neurotic. I'm not going to give him a tic and a limp and all the things you want." Cameron rather envisioned the character as a James Stewart type.[11] Although Jack Dawson was a fictional character, in Fairview Cemetery in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where 121 victims are buried, there is a grave labeled "J. Dawson". The real J. Dawson was Joseph Dawson, who shoveled coal in the bowels of the ship. "It wasn't until after the movie came out that we found out that there was a J. Dawson gravestone," said the film's producer, Jon Landau, in an interview.[16]
Kate Winslet as Rose DeWitt Bukater: Cameron said Winslet "had the thing that you look for" and that there was "a quality in her face, in her eyes," that he "just knew people would be ready to go the distance with her".[10] Rose is a 17-year-old girl, originally from Philadelphia, who is forced into an engagement to 30-year-old Cal Hockley so she and her mother, Ruth, can maintain their high-class status after her father's death had left the family debt-ridden. Rose boards the RMS Titanic with Cal and Ruth, as a first-class passenger, and meets Jack. Winslet said of her character, "She has got a lot to give, and she's got a very open heart. And she wants to explore and adventure the world, but she [feels] that's not going to happen."[10] Gwyneth Paltrow, Winona Ryder, Claire Danes, Gabrielle Anwar, and Reese Witherspoon had been considered for the role.[11][17][18][19] When they turned it down, 20-year-old Winslet campaigned heavily for the role. She sent Cameron daily notes from England, which led Cameron to invite her to Hollywood for auditions. As with DiCaprio, casting director Mali Finn originally brought her to Cameron's attention. When looking for a Rose, Cameron described the character as "an Audrey Hepburn type" and was initially uncertain about casting Winslet even after her screen test impressed him.[11] After she screen tested with DiCaprio, Winslet was so thoroughly impressed with him, that she whispered to Cameron, "He's great. Even if you don't pick me, pick him." Winslet sent Cameron a single rose with a card signed, "From Your Rose", and lobbied him by phone. "You don't understand!" she pleaded one day when she reached him by mobile phone in his Humvee. "I am Rose! I don't know why you're even seeing anyone else!" Her persistence, as well as her talent, eventually convinced him to cast her in the role.[11]
Billy Zane as Cal Hockley: Cal is Rose's 30-year-old fiancé. He is arrogant and snobbish, and the heir to a Pittsburgh steel fortune. He becomes increasingly embarrassed by, jealous of, and cruel about Rose's relationship with Jack. The part was originally offered to Matthew McConaughey,[12] and Rob Lowe has also gone on the record as having pursued it.[20]
Frances Fisher as Ruth DeWitt Bukater: Rose's widowed mother, who arranges her daughter's engagement to Cal to maintain her family's high-society status. She loves her daughter but believes that social position is more important than having a loving marriage. She strongly dislikes Jack, even though he saved her daughter's life.
Gloria Stuart as Rose Dawson Calvert: Rose narrates the film in a modern-day framing device. Cameron stated, "In order to see the present and the past, I decided to create a fictional survivor who is [close to] 101 years, and she connects us in a way through history."[10] The 100-year-old Rose gives Lovett information regarding the "Heart of the Ocean" after he discovers a nude drawing of her in the wreck. She tells the story of her time aboard the ship, mentioning Jack for the first time since the sinking. At 87, Stuart had to be made up to look older for the role.[12] Of casting Stuart, Cameron stated, "My casting director found her. She was sent out on a mission to find retired actresses from the Golden Age of the thirties and forties."[21] Cameron said that he did not know who Stuart was, and Fay Wray was also considered for the role. "But [Stuart] was just so into it, and so lucid, and had such a great spirit. And I saw the connection between her spirit and [Winslet's] spirit," stated Cameron. "I saw this joie de vivre in both of them, that I thought the audience would be able to make that cognitive leap that it's the same person."[21] Stuart died on September 26, 2010, at age 100, approximately the same age elder Rose was in the film.[22]
Bill Paxton as Brock Lovett: A treasure hunter looking for the "Heart of the Ocean" in the wreck of the Titanic in the present. Time and funding for his expedition are running out. He later reflects at the film's conclusion that, despite thinking about Titanic for three years, he has never understood it until he hears Rose's story.
Suzy Amis as Lizzy Calvert: Rose's granddaughter, who accompanies her when she visits Lovett on the ship and learns her grandmother's true identity and romantic past with Jack Dawson.
Danny Nucci as Fabrizio De Rossi: Jack's Italian best friend, who boards the RMS Titanic with him after Jack wins two tickets in a poker game. Fabrizio does not board a lifeboat when the Titanic sinks and is killed when one of the ship's funnels breaks and crashes into the water, crushing him to death.
David Warner as Spicer Lovejoy: An ex-Pinkerton constable, Lovejoy is Cal's English valet and bodyguard, who keeps an eye on Rose and is suspicious about the circumstances surrounding Jack's rescue of her. He dies when the Titanic splits in half, causing him to fall into a massive opening. Warner had appeared in the 1979 TV miniseries S.O.S. Titanic.
Jason Barry as Thomas "Tommy" Ryan: An Irish third-class passenger who befriends Jack and Fabrizio. Tommy is killed when he is accidentally pushed forward and shot by a panicked First Officer Murdoch.
Historical characters[edit]
Although not intended to be an entirely accurate depiction of events,[23] the film includes portrayals of several historical figures:

  The real Margaret Brown (right) giving Captain Arthur Henry Rostron an award for his service in the rescue of Titanic's surviving passengers.
Kathy Bates as Margaret "Molly" Brown: Brown is looked down upon by other first-class women, including Ruth, as "vulgar" and "new money". She is friendly to Jack and lends him a tuxedo (bought for her son) when he is invited to dinner in the first-class dining saloon. Despite Brown being a real person, Cameron decided not to portray her real-life actions. Molly Brown was dubbed "The Unsinkable Molly Brown" by historians because she, with the support of other women, commandeered Lifeboat 6 from Quartermaster Robert Hichens.[24] Some aspects of this altercation are portrayed in Cameron's film.
Victor Garber as Thomas Andrews: The ship's builder, Andrews is portrayed as a very kind and pleasant man who is modest about his grand achievement. After the collision, he tries to convince the others, particularly Ismay, that it is a "mathematical certainty" that the ship will sink. He is depicted during the sinking of the ship as standing next to the clock in the first-class smoking room, lamenting his failure to build a strong and safe ship. Although this has become one of the most famous legends of the sinking of the Titanic, this story, which was published in a 1912 book (Thomas Andrews: Shipbuilder) and therefore perpetuated, came from John Stewart, a steward on the ship who in fact left the ship in boat no.15 at approximately 1:40 a.m.[25] There were testimonies of sightings of Andrews after that moment.[25] It appears that Andrews stayed in the smoking room for some time to gather his thoughts, then he continued assisting with the evacuation.[25] Another reported sighting was of Andrews frantically throwing deck chairs into the ocean for passengers to use as floating devices. Andrews was last seen leaving the ship at the last moment.
Bernard Hill as Captain Edward John Smith: Smith planned to make the Titanic his final voyage before retiring. He retreats into the wheelhouse on the bridge as the ship sinks, dying when the windows implode from the water whilst he clings to the ship's wheel. There are conflicting accounts as to whether he died in this manner or later froze to death in the water near the capsized collapsible lifeboat "B".[26]
Jonathan Hyde as J. Bruce Ismay: Ismay is portrayed as a rich, ignorant upper-class man. In the film, he uses his position as White Star Line managing director to influence Captain Smith to go faster with the prospect of an earlier arrival in New York and favorable press attention; while this action appears in popular portrayals of the disaster, it is unsupported by evidence.[27][28] After the collision, he struggles to comprehend that his "unsinkable" ship is doomed. Ismay later boards Collapsible C (one of the last lifeboats to leave the ship) just before it is lowered. He was branded a coward by the press and public for surviving the disaster while many women and children had drowned.
Eric Braeden as John Jacob Astor IV: A first-class passenger whom Rose (correctly) calls the richest man on the ship. The film depicts Astor and his 18-year-old wife Madeleine (Charlotte Chatton) as being introduced to Jack by Rose in the first-class dining saloon. During the introduction, Astor asks if Jack is connected to the "Boston Dawsons", a question Jack neatly deflects by saying that he is instead affiliated with the Chippewa Falls Dawsons. Astor is last seen as the Grand Staircase glass dome implodes and water surges in.
Bernard Fox as Colonel Archibald Gracie IV: The film depicts Gracie making a comment to Cal that "women and machinery don't mix", and congratulating Jack for saving Rose from falling off the ship, though he is unaware that it was a suicide attempt. Fox had portrayed Frederick Fleet in the 1958 film A Night to Remember.
Michael Ensign as Benjamin Guggenheim: A mining magnate traveling in first-class. He shows off his French mistress Madame Aubert (Fannie Brett) to his fellow passengers while his wife and three daughters wait for him at home. When Jack joins the other first-class passengers for dinner after his rescue of Rose, Guggenheim refers to him as a "bohemian". He is seen in the flooding Grand Staircase during the sinking, saying he is prepared to go down as a gentleman.
Jonathan Evans-Jones as Wallace Hartley: The ship's bandmaster and violinist who plays uplifting music with his colleagues on the boat deck as the ship sinks. As the final plunge begins, he leads the band in a final performance of Nearer, My God, to Thee, to the tune of Bethany,[29][30] and dies in the sinking.
Mark Lindsay Chapman as Chief Officer Henry Wilde: The ship's chief officer, who lets Cal on board a lifeboat because he has a child in his arms. Before he dies, he tries to get the boats to return to the sinking site to rescue passengers by blowing his whistle. After he freezes to death, Rose uses his whistle to attract the attention of Fifth Officer Lowe, which leads to her rescue.
Ewan Stewart as First Officer William Murdoch: The officer who is put in charge of the bridge on the night the ship struck the iceberg. During a rush for the lifeboats, Murdoch shoots Tommy Ryan as well as another passenger in a momentary panic, then commits suicide by shooting himself in the head. When Murdoch's nephew Scott saw the film, he objected to his uncle's portrayal as damaging to Murdoch's heroic reputation.[31] A few months later, Fox vice-president Scott Neeson went to Dalbeattie, Scotland, where Murdoch lived, to deliver a personal apology, and also presented a £5000 donation to Dalbeattie High School to boost the school's William Murdoch Memorial Prize.[32] Cameron apologized on the DVD commentary, but stated that there were officers who fired gunshots to enforce the "women and children first" policy.[33] According to Cameron, his depiction of Murdoch is that of an "honorable man," not of a man "gone bad" or of a "cowardly murderer." He added, "I'm not sure you'd find that same sense of responsibility and total devotion to duty today. This guy had half of his lifeboats launched before his counterpart on the port side had even launched one. That says something about character and heroism."[34]
Jonathan Phillips as Second Officer Charles Lightoller. Lightoller took charge of the port side evacuation. The film depicts Lightoller informing Captain Smith that it will be difficult to see icebergs without breaking water and following the collision suggesting the crew should begin boarding women and children to the lifeboats. He is seen brandishing a gun and threatening to use it to keep order. He can be seen on top of Collapsible B when the first funnel collapses. Lightoller was the most senior officer to have survived the disaster.
Simon Crane as Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall: The officer in charge of firing flares and manning Lifeboat 2 during the sinking. He is shown on the bridge wings helping the seamen firing the flares.
Ioan Gruffudd as Fifth Officer Harold Lowe: The ship's only officer to lead a lifeboat to retrieve survivors of the sinking from the icy waters. The film depicts Lowe rescuing Rose.
Edward Fletcher as Sixth Officer James Moody: The ship's only junior officer to have died in the sinking. The film depicts Moody admitting Jack and Fabrizio onto the ship only moments before it departs from Southampton. Moody is later shown following Mr. Murdoch's orders to put the ship to full speed ahead, and informs First Officer Murdoch about the iceberg. He is last seen clinging to one of the davits on the starboard side after having unsuccessfully attempted to launch collapsible A.
James Lancaster as Father Thomas Byles: Second-class passenger Father Byles, a Catholic priest from England, is portrayed praying and consoling passengers during the ship's final moments.
Lew Palter and Elsa Raven as Isidor Straus and Ida Straus: Isidor is a former owner of R.H. Macy and Company, a former congressman from New York, and a member of the New York and New Jersey Bridge Commission. During the sinking, his wife Ida is offered a place in a lifeboat, but refuses, saying that she will honor her wedding pledge by staying with Isidor. They are last seen lying on their bed embracing each other as water fills their stateroom.
Martin Jarvis as Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon: A Scottish baronet who is rescued in Lifeboat 1. Lifeboats 1 and 2 were emergency boats with a capacity of 40. Situated at the forward end of the boat deck, these were kept ready to launch in case of a person falling overboard. On the night of the disaster, Lifeboat 1 was the fourth to be launched, with 12 people aboard, including Duff-Gordon, his wife and her secretary. The baronet was much criticized for his conduct during the incident. It was suggested that he had boarded the emergency boat in violation of the "women and children first" policy and that the boat had failed to return to rescue those struggling in the water. He offered five pounds to each of the lifeboat's crew, which those critical of his conduct viewed as a bribe. The Duff-Gordons at the time (and his wife's secretary in a letter written at the time and rediscovered in 2007) stated that there had been no women or children waiting to board in the vicinity of the launching of their boat, and there is confirmation that lifeboat 1 of the Titanic was almost empty and that First Officer William Murdoch was apparently glad to offer Duff-Gordon and his wife and her secretary a place (simply to fill it) after they had asked if they could get on. Duff-Gordon denied that his offer of money to the lifeboat crew represented a bribe. The British Board of Trade's inquiry into the disaster accepted Duff-Gordon's denial of bribing the crew, but maintained that, if the emergency boat had rowed towards the people who were in the water, it might very well have been able to rescue some of them.[35][36]
Rosalind Ayres as Lady Duff-Gordon: A world-famous fashion designer and Sir Cosmo's wife. She is rescued in Lifeboat 1 with her husband. She and her husband never lived down rumors that they had forbidden the lifeboat's crew to return to the wreck site in case they would be swamped.[37][38][39]
Rochelle Rose as Noël Leslie, Countess of Rothes: The Countess is shown to be friendly with Cal and the DeWitt Bukaters. Despite being of a higher status in society than Sir Cosmo and Lady Duff-Gordon, she is kind, and helps row the boat and even looks after the steerage passengers.
Scott G. Anderson as Frederick Fleet: The lookout who saw the iceberg. Fleet escapes the sinking ship aboard Lifeboat 6.
Paul Brightwell as Quartermaster Robert Hichens: One of the ship's six quartermasters and at the ship's wheel at the time of collision. He is in charge of lifeboat 6. He refuses to go back and pick up survivors after the sinking and eventually the boat is commandeered by Molly Brown.
Martin East as Reginald Lee: The other lookout in the crow's nest. He survives the sinking.
Gregory Cooke as Jack Phillips: Senior wireless operator on board the Titanic whom Captain Smith ordered to send the distress signal.
Craig Kelly as Harold Bride: Junior wireless operator on board the Titanic.
Liam Tuohy as Chief Baker Charles Joughin: The baker appears in the film on top of the railing with Jack and Rose as the ship sinks, drinking brandy from a flask. According to the real Joughin's testimony, he rode the ship down and stepped into the water without getting his hair wet. He also admitted to hardly feeling the cold, most likely thanks to alcohol.[40]
Terry Forrestal as Chief Engineer Joseph G. Bell: Bell and his men worked until the last minute to keep the lights and the power on in order for distress signals to get out. Bell and all of the engineers died in the bowels of the Titanic.
Cameos[edit]
Several crew members of the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh appear in the film, including Anatoly Sagalevich, creator and pilot of the MIR self-propelled Deep Submergence Vehicle.[41] Anders Falk, who filmed a documentary about the film's sets for the Titanic Historical Society, makes a cameo appearance in the film as a Swedish immigrant whom Jack Dawson meets when he enters his cabin; Edward Kamuda and Karen Kamuda, then President and Vice President of the Society who served as film consultants, were cast as extras in the film.[42][43]

Pre-production[edit]
Writing and inspiration[edit]


"The story could not have been written better...The juxtaposition of rich and poor, the gender roles played out unto death (women first), the stoicism and nobility of a bygone age, the magnificence of the great ship matched in scale only by the folly of the men who drove her hell-bent through the darkness. And above all the lesson: that life is uncertain, the future unknowable...the unthinkable possible."


— James Cameron[44]

James Cameron had a fascination with shipwrecks, and for him the RMS Titanic was "the Mount Everest of shipwrecks".[45][46][47] He was almost past the point in his life when he felt he could consider an undersea expedition, but said he still had "a mental restlessness" to live the life he had turned away from when he switched from the sciences to the arts in college. So when an IMAX film was made from footage shot of the wreck itself, he decided to seek Hollywood funding to "pay for an expedition and do the same thing". It was "not because I particularly wanted to make the movie," Cameron said. "I wanted to dive to the shipwreck."[45]
Cameron wrote a scriptment for a Titanic film,[48] met with 20th Century Fox executives including Peter Chernin, and pitched it as "Romeo and Juliet on the Titanic".[46][47] Cameron stated, "They were like, 'Oooooohkaaaaaay – a three-hour romantic epic? Sure, that's just what we want. Is there a little bit of Terminator in that? Any Harrier jets, shoot-outs, or car chases?' I said, 'No, no, no. It's not like that.'"[11] The studio was dubious about the idea's commercial prospects, but, hoping for a long-term relationship with Cameron, they gave him a greenlight.[11][12][21]

  Director, writer and producer James Cameron
Cameron convinced Fox to promote the film based on the publicity afforded by shooting the Titanic wreck itself,[48] and organized several dives to the site over a period of two years.[44] "My pitch on that had to be a little more detailed," said Cameron. "So I said, 'Look, we've got to do this whole opening where they're exploring the Titanic and they find the diamond, so we're going to have all these shots of the ship." Cameron stated, "Now, we can either do them with elaborate models and motion control shots and CG and all that, which will cost X amount of money – or we can spend X plus 30 per cent and actually go shoot it at the real wreck."[46] The crew shot at the real wreck in the Atlantic Ocean twelve times in 1995 and actually spent more time with the ship than its passengers. At that depth, with a water pressure of 6,000 pounds per square inch, "one small flaw in the vessel's superstructure would mean instant death for all on board." Not only were the dives high-risk, but adverse conditions prevented Cameron from getting the high quality footage that he wanted.[12] During one dive, one of the submersibles collided with Titanic's hull, damaging both sub and ship and leaving fragments of the submersible's propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure. The external bulkhead of Captain Smith's quarters collapsed, exposing the interior. The area around the entrance to the Grand Staircase was also damaged.[49]
Descending to the actual site made both Cameron and crew want "to live up to that level of reality ... But there was another level of reaction coming away from the real wreck, which was that it wasn't just a story, it wasn't just a drama," he said. "It was an event that happened to real people who really died. Working around the wreck for so much time, you get such a strong sense of the profound sadness and injustice of it, and the message of it." Cameron stated, "You think, 'There probably aren't going to be many filmmakers who go to Titanic. There may never be another one – maybe a documentarian." Due to this, he felt "a great mantle of responsibility to convey the emotional message of it – to do that part of it right, too".[21]
After filming the underwater shots, Cameron began writing the screenplay.[48] He wanted to honor the people who died during the sinking, so he spent six months researching all of the Titanic's crew and passengers.[44] "I read everything I could. I created an extremely detailed timeline of the ship's few days and a very detailed timeline of the last night of its life," he said.[46] "And I worked within that to write the script, and I got some historical experts to analyze what I'd written and comment on it, and I adjusted it."[46] He paid meticulous attention to detail, even including a scene depicting the Californian's role in Titanic's demise, though this was later cut (see below). From the beginning of the shoot, they had "a very clear picture" of what happened on the ship that night. "I had a library that filled one whole wall of my writing office with Titanic stuff, because I wanted it to be right, especially if we were going to dive to the ship," he said. "That set the bar higher in a way – it elevated the movie in a sense. We wanted this to be a definitive visualization of this moment in history as if you'd gone back in a time machine and shot it."[46]
Cameron felt the Titanic sinking was "like a great novel that really happened", but that the event had become a mere morality tale; the film would give audiences the experience of living the history.[44] The treasure hunter Brock Lovett represented those who never connected with the human element of the tragedy,[41] while the blossoming romance of Jack and Rose, Cameron believed, would be the most engaging part of the story: when their love is finally destroyed, the audience would mourn the loss.[44] He said: "All my films are love stories, but in Titanic I finally got the balance right. It's not a disaster film. It's a love story with a fastidious overlay of real history."[21]
Cameron framed the romance with the elderly Rose to make the intervening years palpable and poignant.[44] While Winslet and Stuart stated their belief that, instead of being asleep in her bed, the character dies at the end of the film,[50][51] Cameron said that he would rather not reveal what he intended with the ending because "[t]he answer has to be something you supply personally; individually."[9]

Scale modeling[edit]
  The reconstruction of the RMS Titanic. The blueprints were supplied by the original ship's builder and Cameron tried to make the ship as detailed and accurate as possible.[52]
Harland and Wolff, the RMS Titanic's builders, opened their private archives to the crew, sharing blueprints that were thought lost. For the ship's interiors, production designer Peter Lamont's team looked for artifacts from the era. The newness of the ship meant every prop had to be made from scratch.[52] Fox acquired 40 acres of waterfront south of Playas de Rosarito in Mexico, and began building a new studio on May 31, 1996. A horizon tank of seventeen million gallons was built for the exterior of the reconstructed ship, providing 270 degrees of ocean view. The ship was built to full scale, but Lamont removed redundant sections on the superstructure and forward well deck for the ship to fit in the tank, with the remaining sections filled with digital models. The lifeboats and funnels were shrunken by ten percent. The boat deck and A-deck were working sets, but the rest of the ship was just steel plating. Within was a fifty-foot lifting platform for the ship to tilt during the sinking sequences. Towering above was a 162-foot-tall (49 m) tower crane on 600 feet (180 m) of rail track, acting as a combined construction, lighting, and camera platform.[41]
The sets representing the interior rooms of the Titanic were reproduced exactly as originally built, using photographs and plans from the Titanic's builders. The Grand Staircase, which features prominently in the film, was recreated to a high standard of authenticity, though it was widened 30% compared to the original and reinforced with steel girders. Craftsmen from Mexico and Britain sculpted the ornate paneling and plaster-work based on Titanic's original designs.[53] The carpeting, upholstery, individual pieces of furniture, light fixtures, chairs, cutlery and crockery with the White Star Line crest on each piece were among the objects recreated according to original designs.[54] Cameron additionally hired two Titanic historians, Don Lynch and Ken Marschall, to authenticate the historical detail in the film.[12]

Production[edit]
Principal photography for Titanic began in July 1996 at Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, with the filming of the modern day expedition scenes aboard the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh.[41] In September 1996, the production moved to the newly built Fox Baja Studios in Rosarito, Mexico, where a full scale RMS Titanic had been constructed.[41] The poop deck was built on a hinge which could rise from zero to 90 degrees in a few seconds, just as the ship's stern rose during the sinking.[55] For the safety of the stuntmen, many props were made of foam rubber.[56] By November 15, the boarding scenes were being shot.[55] Cameron chose to build his RMS Titanic on the starboard side as a study of weather data revealed it was a prevailing north-to-south wind which blew the funnel smoke aft. This posed a problem for shooting the ship's departure from Southampton, as it was docked on its port side. Implementation of written directions, as well as props and costumes, had to be reversed; for example, if someone walked to their right in the script, they had to walk left during shooting. In post-production, the film was flipped to the correct direction.[57]
A full-time etiquette coach was hired to instruct the cast in the manners of the upper class gentility in 1912.[12] Despite this, several critics picked up on anachronisms in the film, not least involving the two main stars.[58][59]

  Cameron's nude sketch of Rose wearing the "Heart of the Ocean". The associated nude scene was one of the first scenes shot, as the main set was not yet ready.[21]
Cameron sketched Jack's nude portrait of Rose[60] for a scene which he feels has the backdrop of repression. "You know what it means for her, the freedom she must be feeling. It's kind of exhilarating for that reason," he said.[21] The nude scene was DiCaprio and Winslet's first scene together. "It wasn't by any kind of design, although I couldn't have designed it better. There's a nervousness and an energy and a hesitance in them," Cameron stated. "They had rehearsed together, but they hadn't shot anything together. If I'd had a choice, I probably would have preferred to put it deeper into the body of the shoot." Cameron said he and his crew "were just trying to find things to shoot" because the big set "wasn't ready for months, so we were scrambling around trying to fill in anything we could get to shoot." After seeing the scene on film, Cameron felt it worked out considerably well.[21]
Other times on the set were not as smooth. The shoot was an arduous experience that "cemented Cameron's formidable reputation as 'the scariest man in Hollywood'. He became known as an uncompromising, hard-charging perfectionist" and a "300-decibel screamer, a modern-day Captain Bligh with a megaphone and walkie-talkie, swooping down into people's faces on a 162ft crane".[61] Winslet chipped a bone in her elbow during filming and had been worried that she would drown in the 17m-gallon water tank the ship was to be sunk in. "There were times when I was genuinely frightened of him. Jim has a temper like you wouldn't believe," she said.[61] "'God damn it!' he would yell at some poor crew member, 'that's exactly what I didn't want!'"[61] Her co-star, Bill Paxton, was familiar with Cameron's work ethic from his earlier experience with him. "There were a lot of people on the set. Jim is not one of those guys who has the time to win hearts and minds," he said.[61] The crew felt Cameron had an evil alter ego and so nicknamed him "Mij" (Jim spelled backwards).[61] In response to the criticism, Cameron stated, "Film-making is war. A great battle between business and aesthetics."[61]
During the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh shoot in Canada, an angry crew member put the dissociative drug PCP into the soup that Cameron and various others ate one night in Dartmouth, Nova Scotia.[11][62] It sent more than 50 people to the hospital, including Paxton.[62] "There were people just rolling around, completely out of it. Some of them said they were seeing streaks and psychedelics," said actor Lewis Abernathy.[11] Cameron managed to vomit before the drug took a full hold. Abernathy was shocked at the way he looked. "One eye was completely red, like the Terminator eye. A pupil, no iris, beet red. The other eye looked like he'd been sniffing glue since he was four."[11][61] The person behind the poisoning was never caught.[50][63]

The filming schedule was intended to last 138 days but grew to 160. Many cast members came down with colds, flu, or kidney infections after spending hours in cold water, including Winslet. In the end, she decided she would not work with Cameron again unless she earned "a lot of money".[63] Several others left the production, and three stuntmen broke their bones, but the Screen Actors Guild decided, following an investigation, that nothing was inherently unsafe about the set.[63] Additionally, DiCaprio said there was no point when he felt he was in danger during filming.[64] Cameron believed in a passionate work ethic and never apologized for the way he ran his sets, although he acknowledged:I'm demanding, and I'm demanding on my crew. In terms of being kind of militaresque, I think there's an element of that in dealing with thousands of extras and big logistics and keeping people safe. I think you have to have a fairly strict methodology in dealing with a large number of people.[63]
The costs of filming Titanic eventually began to mount and finally reached $200 million,[4][5][6] a bit over $1 million per minute of screen time.[65] Fox executives panicked and suggested an hour of specific cuts from the three-hour film. They argued the extended length would mean fewer showings, thus less revenue, even though long epics are more likely to help directors win Oscars. Cameron refused, telling Fox, "You want to cut my movie? You're going to have to fire me! You want to fire me? You're going to have to kill me!"[11] The executives did not want to start over, because it would mean the loss of their entire investment, but they also initially rejected Cameron's offer of forfeiting his share of the profits as an empty gesture, as they predicted profits would be unlikely.[11]
Cameron explained forfeiting his share as complex. "... the short version is that the film cost proportionally much more than T2 and True Lies. Those films went up seven or eight percent from the initial budget. Titanic also had a large budget to begin with, but it went up a lot more," he said. "As the producer and director, I take responsibility for the studio that's writing the checks, so I made it less painful for them. I did that on two different occasions. They didn't force me to do it; they were glad that I did."[21]

Post-production[edit]
Effects[edit]
Cameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects with his film, and enlisted Digital Domain to continue the developments in digital technology which the director pioneered while working on The Abyss and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Many previous films about the RMS Titanic shot water in slow motion, which did not look wholly convincing.[66] Cameron encouraged his crew to shoot their 45-foot-long (14 m) miniature of the ship as if "we're making a commercial for the White Star Line".[67] Afterwards, digital water and smoke were added, as were extras captured on a motion capture stage. Visual effects supervisor Rob Legato scanned the faces of many actors, including himself and his children, for the digital extras and stuntmen. There was also a 65-foot-long (20 m) model of the ship's stern that could break in two repeatedly, the only miniature to be used in water.[66] For scenes set in the ship's engines, footage of the SS Jeremiah O'Brien's engines were composited with miniature support frames, and actors shot against a greenscreen.[68] In order to save money, the first-class lounge was a miniature set incorporated into a greenscreen backdrop behind the actors.[69] The miniature of the Lounge would later be crushed to simulate the destruction of the room and a scale model of a First-Class corridor flooded with jets of water while the camera pans out.[70]

  Unlike previous Titanic films, Cameron's retelling of the disaster showed the ship breaking into two pieces before sinking entirely. The scenes were an account of the moment's most likely outcome.
An enclosed 5,000,000-US-gallon (19,000,000 L) tank was used for sinking interiors, in which the entire set could be tilted into the water. In order to sink the Grand Staircase, 90,000 US gallons (340,000 L) of water were dumped into the set as it was lowered into the tank. Unexpectedly, the waterfall ripped the staircase from its steel-reinforced foundations, although no one was hurt. The 744-foot-long (227 m) exterior of the RMS Titanic had its first half lowered into the tank, but as the heaviest part of the ship it acted as a shock absorber against the water; to get the set into the water, Cameron had much of the set emptied and even smashed some of the promenade windows himself. After submerging the dining saloon, three days were spent shooting Lovett's ROV traversing the wreck in the present.[41] The post-sinking scenes in the freezing Atlantic were shot in a 350,000-US-gallon (1,300,000 L) tank,[71] where the frozen corpses were created by applying on actors a powder that crystallized when exposed to water, and wax was coated on hair and clothes.[52]
The climactic scene, which features the breakup of the ship directly before it sinks as well as its final plunge to the bottom of the Atlantic, involved a tilting full-sized set, 150 extras, and 100 stunt performers. Cameron criticized previous Titanic films for depicting the liner's final plunge as a graceful slide underwater. He "wanted to depict it as the terrifyingly chaotic event that it really was".[12] When carrying out the sequence, people needed to fall off the increasingly tilting deck, plunging hundreds of feet below and bouncing off of railings and propellers on the way down. A few attempts to film this sequence with stunt people resulted in some minor injuries, and Cameron halted the more dangerous stunts. The risks were eventually minimized "by using computer generated people for the dangerous falls".[12]

Editing[edit]
There was one "crucial historical fact" Cameron chose to omit from the film – the SS Californian was close to the Titanic the night she sank but had turned off its radio for the night, did not hear her crew's SOS calls, and did not respond to their distress flares.  "Yes, the [SS] Californian. That wasn't a compromise to mainstream filmmaking. That was really more about emphasis, creating an emotional truth to the film," stated Cameron. He said there were aspects of retelling the sinking that seemed important in pre- and post-production, but turned out to be less important as the film evolved. "The story of the Californian was in there; we even shot a scene of them switching off their Marconi radio set," said Cameron. "But I took it out. It was a clean cut, because it focuses you back onto that world. If Titanic is powerful as a metaphor, as a microcosm, for the end of the world in a sense, then that world must be self-contained."[21]
During the first assembly cut, Cameron altered the planned ending, which had given resolution to Brock Lovett's story. In the original version of the ending, Brock and Lizzy see the elderly Rose at the stern of the boat and fear she is going to commit suicide. Rose then reveals that she had the "Heart of the Ocean" diamond all along but never sold it, in order to live on her own without Cal's money. She tells Brock that life is priceless and throws the diamond into the ocean, after allowing him to hold it. After accepting that treasure is worthless, Brock laughs at his stupidity. Rose then goes back to her cabin to sleep, whereupon the film ends in the same way as the final version. In the editing room, Cameron decided that by this point, the audience would no longer be interested in Brock Lovett and cut the resolution to his story, so that Rose is alone when she drops the diamond. He also did not want to disrupt the audience's melancholy after the Titanic's sinking.[72] Paxton agreed that his scene with Brock's epiphany and laugh was unnecessary, stating that "I would have shot heroin to make the scene work better ...you didn't really need anything from us. Our job was done by then ... If you're smart and you take the ego and the narcissism out of it, you'll listen to the film, and the film will tell you what it needs and what it does not need".[73]
The version used for the first test screening featured a fight between Jack and Lovejoy which takes place after Jack and Rose escape into the flooded dining saloon, but the test audiences disliked it.[74] The scene was written to give the film more suspense, and featured Cal (falsely) offering to give Lovejoy, his valet, the "Heart of the Ocean" if he can get it from Jack and Rose. Lovejoy goes after the pair in the sinking first-class dining room. Just as they are about to escape him, Lovejoy notices Rose's hand slap the water as it slips off the table behind which she is hiding. In revenge for framing him for the "theft" of the necklace, Jack attacks him and smashes his head against a glass window, which explains the gash on Lovejoy's head that can be seen when he dies in the completed version of the film. In their reactions to the scene, test audiences said it would be unrealistic to risk one's life for wealth, and Cameron cut it for this reason, as well as for timing and pacing reasons. Many other scenes were cut for similar reasons.[74]

Music and soundtrack[edit]
Main articles: Titanic: Music from the Motion Picture and Back to Titanic
The soundtrack album for Titanic was composed by James Horner. For the vocals heard throughout the film, subsequently described by Earle Hitchner of The Wall Street Journal as "evocative", Horner chose Norwegian singer Sissel Kyrkjebø, commonly known as "Sissel". Horner knew Sissel from her album Innerst i sjelen, and he particularly liked how she sang "Eg veit i himmerik ei borg" ("I Know in Heaven There Is a Castle"). He had tried twenty-five or thirty singers before he finally chose Sissel as the voice to create specific moods within the film.[75]
Horner additionally wrote the song "My Heart Will Go On" in secret with Will Jennings because Cameron did not want any songs with singing in the film.[76] Céline Dion agreed to record a demo with the persuasion of her husband René Angélil. Horner waited until Cameron was in an appropriate mood before presenting him with the song. After playing it several times, Cameron declared his approval, although worried that he would have been criticized for "going commercial at the end of the movie".[76] Cameron also wanted to appease anxious studio executives and "saw that a hit song from his movie could only be a positive factor in guaranteeing its completion".[12]

Release[edit]
Initial screening[edit]
20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures co-financed Titanic, with Paramount handling the North American distribution and Fox handling the international release. They expected Cameron to complete the film for a release on July 2, 1997. The film was to be released on this date "in order to exploit the lucrative summer season ticket sales when blockbuster films usually do better".[12] In April, Cameron said the film's special effects were too complicated and that releasing the film for summer would not be possible.[12] With production delays, Paramount pushed back the release date to December 19, 1997.[77] "This fueled speculation that the film itself was a disaster." A preview screening in Minneapolis on July 14 "generated positive reviews" and "[c]hatter on the internet was responsible for more favorable word of mouth about the [film]". This eventually led to more positive media coverage.[12]
The film premiered on November 1, 1997, at the Tokyo International Film Festival,[78] where reaction was described as "tepid" by The New York Times.[79] Positive reviews started to appear back in the United States; the official Hollywood premiere occurred on December 14, 1997, where "the big movie stars who attended the opening were enthusiastically gushing about the film to the world media".[12]

Box office[edit]
Including revenue from the 2012 and 2017 reissues, Titanic earned $659.4 million in North America and $1.528 billion in other countries, for a worldwide total of $2.187 billion.[7] It became the highest-grossing film of all time worldwide in 1998, and remained so for twelve years, until Avatar (2009), also written and directed by Cameron, surpassed it in 2010.[80] On March 1, 1998,[81] it became the first film to earn more than $1 billion worldwide[82] and on the weekend April 13–15, 2012—a century after the original vessel's foundering, Titanic became the second film to cross the $2 billion threshold during its 3D re-release.[83] Box Office Mojo estimates that Titanic is the fifth highest-grossing film of all time in North America when adjusting for ticket price inflation.[84] The site also estimates that the film sold over 128 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.[85]
Titanic was the first foreign-language film to succeed in India, which has the largest movie-going audience in the world.[86] A 2012 Hindustan Times report attributes this to the film's similarities and shared themes with most Bollywood films.[87]

Initial theatrical run[edit]
The film received steady attendance after opening in North America on Friday, December 19, 1997. By the end of that same weekend, theaters were beginning to sell out. The film earned $8,658,814 on its opening day and $28,638,131 over the opening weekend from 2,674 theaters, averaging to about $10,710 per venue, and ranking number one at the box office, ahead of the eighteenth James Bond film, Tomorrow Never Dies. By New Year's Day, Titanic had made over $120 million, had increased in popularity and theaters continued to sell out. Its highest grossing single day was Saturday, February 14, 1998, on which it earned $13,048,711, more than eight weeks after its North American debut.[88][89] It stayed at number one for 15 consecutive weeks in North America, a record for any film.[90] The film stayed in theaters in North America for almost 10 months before finally closing on Thursday, October 1, 1998 with a final domestic gross of $600,788,188.[91] (equivalent to $937.7  million in 2018[92]) Outside North America, the film made double its North American gross, generating $1,242,413,080[93] and accumulating a grand total of $1,843,201,268 worldwide from its initial theatrical run.[94]

Commercial analysis[edit]
Before Titanic's release, various film critics predicted the film would be a significant disappointment at the box office, especially due to it being the most expensive film ever made at the time.[61][95][96][97] When it was shown to the press in autumn of 1997, "it was with massive forebodings" since the "people in charge of the screenings believed they were on the verge of losing their jobs – because of this great albatross of a picture on which, finally, two studios had to combine to share the great load of its making".[96] Cameron also thought he was "headed for disaster" at one point during filming. "We labored the last six months on Titanic in the absolute knowledge that the studio would lose $100 million. It was a certainty," he stated.[61] As the film neared release, "particular venom was spat at Cameron for what was seen as his hubris and monumental extravagance". A film critic for the Los Angeles Times wrote that "Cameron's overweening pride has come close to capsizing this project" and that the film was "a hackneyed, completely derivative copy of old Hollywood romances".[61]



"It's hard to forget the director on the stage of the Shrine Auditorium in LA, exultant, pumping a golden Oscar statuette into the air and shouting: 'I'm the king of the world!' As everyone knew, that was the most famous line in Titanic, exclaimed by Leonardo DiCaprio's character as he leaned into the wind on the prow of the doomed vessel. Cameron's incantation of the line was a giant 'eff off', in front of a television audience approaching a billion, to all the naysayers, especially those sitting right in front of him."


— Christopher Goodwin of The Times on Cameron's response to Titanic's criticism[61]

When the film became a success, with an unprecedented box office performance, it was credited for being a love story that captured its viewers' emotions.[95] The film was playing on 3,200 screens ten weeks after it opened,[96] and out of its fifteen straight weeks on top of the charts, jumped 43% in total sales in its ninth week of release. It earned over $20 million a week for ten weeks,[98] and after 14 weeks was still bringing in more than $1 million a week.[96] 20th Century Fox estimated that seven percent of American teenage girls had seen Titanic twice by its fifth week.[99] Although young women who saw the film several times, and subsequently caused "Leo-Mania", were often credited with having primarily propelled the film to its all-time box office record,[100] other reports have attributed the film's success to positive word of mouth and repeat viewership due to the love story combined with the ground-breaking special effects.[98][101]
The film's impact on men has also been especially credited.[102][103][104] Considered one of the films that make men cry,[102][103] MSNBC's Ian Hodder stated that men admire Jack's sense of adventure and his ambitious behavior to win over Rose, which contributes to their emotional attachment to Jack.[102] The film's ability to make men cry was briefly parodied in the 2009 film Zombieland, where character Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), when recalling the death of his young son, states: "I haven't cried like that since Titanic."[105]
In 2010, the BBC analyzed the stigma over men crying during Titanic and films in general. "Middle-aged men are not 'supposed' to cry during movies," stated Finlo Rohrer of the website, citing the ending of Titanic as having generated such tears, adding that "men, if they have felt weepy during [this film], have often tried to be surreptitious about it." Professor Mary Beth Oliver, of Penn State University, stated, "For many men, there is a great deal of pressure to avoid expression of 'female' emotions like sadness and fear. From a very young age, males are taught that it is inappropriate to cry, and these lessons are often accompanied by a great deal of ridicule when the lessons aren't followed." Rohrer said, "Indeed, some men who might sneer at the idea of crying during Titanic will readily admit to becoming choked up during Saving Private Ryan or Platoon." For men in general, "the idea of sacrifice for a 'brother' is a more suitable source of emotion".[103]
Scott Meslow of The Atlantic stated while Titanic initially seems to need no defense, given its success, it is considered a film "for 15-year-old girls" by its main detractors. He argued that dismissing Titanic as fodder for 15-year-old girls fails to consider the film's accomplishment: "that [this] grandiose, 3+ hour historical romantic drama is a film for everyone—including teenage boys." Meslow stated that despite the film being ranked high by males under the age of 18, matching the ratings for teenage boy-targeted films like Iron Man, it is common for boys and men to deny liking Titanic. He acknowledged his own rejection of the film as a child while secretly loving it. "It's this collection of elements—the history, the romance, the action—that made (and continues to make) Titanic an irresistible proposition for audiences of all ages across the globe," he stated. "Titanic has flaws, but for all its legacy, it's better than its middlebrow reputation would have you believe. It's a great movie for 15-year-old girls, but that doesn't mean it's not a great movie for everyone else too."[104]
Quotes in the film aided its popularity. Titanic's catchphrase "I'm the king of the world!" became one of the film industry's more popular quotations.[106][107] According to Richard Harris, a psychology professor at Kansas State University, who studied why people like to cite films in social situations, using film quotations in everyday conversation is similar to telling a joke and a way to form solidarity with others. "People are doing it to feel good about themselves, to make others laugh, to make themselves laugh", he said.[107]
Cameron explained the film's success as having significantly benefited from the experience of sharing. "When people have an experience that's very powerful in the movie theatre, they want to go share it. They want to grab their friend and bring them, so that they can enjoy it," he said. "They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life. That's how Titanic worked."[108] Media Awareness Network stated, "The normal
repeat viewing rate for a blockbuster theatrical film is about 5%. The repeat rate for Titanic was over 20%."[12] The box office receipts "were even more impressive" when factoring in "the film's 3-hour-and-14-minute length meant that it could only be shown three times a day compared to a normal movie's four showings". In response to this, "[m]any theatres started midnight showings and were rewarded with full houses until almost 3:30 am".[12]
Titanic held the record for box office gross for twelve years.[109] Cameron's follow-up film, Avatar, was considered the first film with a genuine chance at surpassing its worldwide gross,[110][111] and did so in 2010.[80] Various explanations for why the film was able to successfully challenge Titanic were given. For one, "Two-thirds of Titanic's haul was earned overseas, and Avatar [tracked] similarly... Avatar opened in 106 markets globally and was no. 1 in all of them" and the markets "such as Russia, where Titanic saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998, are white-hot today" with "more screens and moviegoers" than ever before.[112] Brandon Gray, president of Box Office Mojo, said that while Avatar may beat Titanic's revenue record, the film is unlikely to surpass Titanic in attendance. "Ticket prices were about $3 cheaper in the late 1990s."[110] In December 2009, Cameron had stated, "I don't think it's realistic to try to topple Titanic off its perch. Some pretty good movies have come out in the last few years. Titanic just struck some kind of chord."[98] In a January 2010 interview, he gave a different take on the matter once Avatar's performance was easier to predict. "It's gonna happen. It's just a matter of time," he said.[111]
Author Alexandra Keller, when analyzing Titanic's success, stated that scholars could agree that the film's popularity "appears dependent on contemporary culture, on perceptions of history, on patterns of consumerism and globalization, as well as on those elements experienced filmgoers conventionally expect of juggernaut film events in the 1990s – awesome screen spectacle, expansive action, and, more rarely seen, engaging characters and epic drama."[113]

Critical reception[edit]
Titanic garnered mainly positive reviews from film critics, and was positively reviewed by audiences and scholars, who commented on the film's cultural, historical and political impacts.[113][114][115] On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 88% based on 178 reviews, with a rating average of 8/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "A mostly unqualified triumph for Cameron, who offers a dizzying blend of spectacular visuals and old-fashioned melodrama."[101] At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating to reviews, the film has a score of 75 based on 34 critics, indicating "generally favorably reviews".[116] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale, one of fewer than 60 films in the history of the service to earn the score.[117]
With regard to the film's overall design, Roger Ebert stated, "It is flawlessly crafted, intelligently constructed, strongly acted, and spellbinding... Movies like this are not merely difficult to make at all, but almost impossible to make well." He credited the "technical difficulties" with being "so daunting that it's a wonder when the filmmakers are also able to bring the drama and history into proportion" and "found [himself] convinced by both the story and the sad saga".[118] He named it his ninth best film of 1997.[119] On the television program Siskel & Ebert, the film received "two thumbs up" and was praised for its accuracy in recreating the ship's sinking; Ebert described the film as "a glorious Hollywood epic" and "well worth the wait," and Gene Siskel found Leonardo DiCaprio "captivating".[120] James Berardinelli stated, "Meticulous in detail, yet vast in scope and intent, Titanic is the kind of epic motion picture event that has become a rarity. You don't just watch Titanic, you experience it."[121] It was named his second best film of 1997.[122] Almar Haflidason of the BBC wrote that "the sinking of the great ship is no secret, yet for many exceeded expectations in sheer scale and tragedy" and that "when you consider that [the film] tops a bum-numbing three-hour running time, then you have a truly impressive feat of entertainment achieved by Cameron".[123] Joseph McBride of Boxoffice Magazine concluded, "To describe Titanic as the greatest disaster movie ever made is to sell it short. James Cameron's recreation of the 1912 sinking of the 'unsinkable' liner is one of the most magnificent pieces of serious popular entertainment ever to emanate from Hollywood."[124]
The romantic and emotionally charged aspects of the film were equally praised. Andrew L. Urban of Urban Cinefile said, "You will walk out of Titanic not talking about budget or running time, but of its enormous emotive power, big as the engines of the ship itself, determined as its giant propellers to gouge into your heart, and as lasting as the love story that propels it."[125] Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described the film as, "A lush and terrifying spectacle of romantic doom. Writer-director James Cameron has restaged the defining catastrophe of the early 20th century on a human scale of such purified yearning and dread that he touches the deepest levels of popular moviemaking."[124] Janet Maslin of The New York Times commented that "Cameron's magnificent Titanic is the first spectacle in decades that honestly invites comparison to Gone With the Wind."[124] Richard Corliss of Time magazine, on the other hand, wrote a mostly negative review, criticizing the lack of interesting emotional elements.[126]
Some reviewers felt that the story and dialogue were weak,[115] while the visuals were spectacular. Kenneth Turan's review in the Los Angeles Times was particularly scathing. Dismissing the emotive elements, he stated, "What really brings on the tears is Cameron's insistence that writing this kind of movie is within his abilities. Not only is it not, it is not even close.",[127] and later claimed that the only reason that the film won Oscars was because of its box office total.[128] Barbara Shulgasser of The San Francisco Examiner gave Titanic one star out of four, citing a friend as saying, "The number of times in this unbelievably badly written script that the two [lead characters] refer to each other by name was an indication of just how dramatically the script lacked anything more interesting for the actors to say."[129] Also, filmmaker Robert Altman called it "the most dreadful piece of work I've ever seen in my entire life".[130] In his 2012 study of the lives of the passengers on the Titanic, historian Richard Davenport-Hines said, "Cameron's film diabolized rich Americans and educated English, anathematizing their emotional restraint, good tailoring, punctilious manners and grammatical training, while it made romantic heroes of the poor Irish and the unlettered".[131]
Titanic suffered backlash in addition to its success. In 2003, the film topped a poll of "Best Film Endings",[132] and yet it also topped a poll by Film 2003 as "the worst movie of all time".[133] The British film magazine Empire reduced their rating of the film from the maximum five stars and an enthusiastic review, to four stars with a less positive review in a later edition, to accommodate its readers' tastes, who wanted to disassociate themselves from the hype surrounding the film, and the reported activities of its fans, such as those attending multiple screenings.[134] In addition to this, positive and negative parodies and other such spoofs of the film abounded and were circulated on the internet, often inspiring passionate responses from fans of various opinions of the film.[135] Benjamin Willcock of DVDActive.com did not understand the backlash or the passionate hatred for the film. "What really irks me...," he said, "are those who make nasty stabs at those who do love it." Willcock stated, "I obviously don't have anything against those who dislike Titanic, but those few who make you feel small and pathetic for doing so (and they do exist, trust me) are way beyond my understanding and sympathy."[97]
Cameron responded to the backlash, and Kenneth Turan's review in particular. "Titanic is not a film that is sucking people in with flashy hype and spitting them out onto the street feeling let down and ripped off," he stated. "They are returning again and again to repeat an experience that is taking a 3-hour and 14-minute chunk out of their lives, and dragging others with them, so they can share the emotion." Cameron emphasized people from all ages (ranging from 8 to 80) and from all backgrounds were "celebrating their own essential humanity" by seeing it. He described the script as earnest and straightforward, and said it intentionally "incorporates universals of human experience and emotion that are timeless – and familiar because they reflect our basic emotional fabric" and that the film was able to succeed in this way by dealing with archetypes. He did not see it as pandering. "Turan mistakes archetype for cliche," he said. "I don't share his view that the best scripts are only the ones that explore the perimeter of human experience, or flashily pirouette their witty and cynical dialogue for our admiration."[136]
Empire eventually reinstated its original five star rating of the film, commenting, "It should be no surprise then that it became fashionable to bash James Cameron's Titanic at approximately the same time it became clear that this was the planet's favourite film. Ever."[137] In 2017, on the 20th anniversary of its release, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[138]

Accolades[edit]
Main article: List of accolades received by Titanic
Titanic began its awards sweep starting with the Golden Globes, winning four, namely Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Original Score, and Best Original Song.[139] Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart were also nominees.[140] It won the ACE "Eddie" Award, ASC Award, Art Directors Guild Award, Cinema Audio Society Awards, Screen Actors Guild Award (Best Supporting Actress for Gloria Stuart), The Directors Guild of America Award, and Broadcast Film Critics Association Award (Best Director for James Cameron), and The Producer Guild of America Award.[141] It was also nominated for ten BAFTA awards, including Best Film and Best Director; it failed to win any.[141]
The film garnered fourteen Academy Award nominations, tying the record set in 1950 by Joseph L. Mankiewicz's All About Eve[142] and won eleven: Best Picture (the second film about the Titanic to win that award, after 1933's Cavalcade), Best Director, Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects, Best Film Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Gary Summers, Mark Ulano), Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Original Dramatic Score, Best Original Song.[141][143] Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart and the make-up artists were the three nominees that did not win. James Cameron's original screenplay and Leonardo DiCaprio were not nominees.[95] It was the second film to receive eleven Academy Awards, after Ben-Hur.[141] The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King would also match this record in 2004.
Titanic won the 1997 Academy Award for Best Original Song, as well as three Grammy Awards for Record of the Year, Song of the Year, and Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television.[141][144][145] The film's soundtrack became the best-selling primarily orchestral soundtrack of all time, and became a worldwide success, spending sixteen weeks at number-one in the United States, and was certified diamond for over eleven million copies sold in the United States alone.[146] The soundtrack also became the best-selling album of 1998 in the U.S.[147] "My Heart Will Go On" won the Grammy Awards for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television. The film also won Best Male Performance for Leonardo DiCaprio and Best Movie at the MTV Movie Awards, Best Film at the People's Choice Awards, and Favorite Movie at the 1998 Kids' Choice Awards.[141] It won various awards outside the United States, including the Awards of the Japanese Academy as the Best Foreign Film of the Year.[141] Titanic eventually won nearly ninety awards and had an additional forty-seven nominations from various award-giving bodies around the world.[141] Additionally, the book about the making of the film was at the top of The New York Times' bestseller list for several weeks, "the first time that such a tie-in book had achieved this status".[12]
Since its release, Titanic has appeared on the American Film Institute's award-winning 100 Years... series. So far, it has ranked on the following six lists:




AFI's 100 Years...100

Rank

Source

Notes


Thrills

25

[148]

A list of the top 100 thrilling films in American cinema, compiled in 2001.


Passions

37

[149]

A list of the top 100 love stories in American cinema, compiled in 2002.


Songs

14

[150]

A list of the top 100 songs in American cinema, compiled in 2004. Titanic ranked 14th for Céline Dion's "My Heart Will Go On".


Movie quotes

100

[106]

A list of the top 100 film quotations in American cinema, compiled in 2005. Titanic ranked 100th for Jack Dawson's yell of "I'm the king of the world!"


Movies

83

[151]

A 2007 (10th anniversary) edition of 1997's list of the 100 best films of the past century. Titanic was not eligible when the original list was released.


AFI's 10 Top 10

6

[152]

The 2008 poll consisted of the top ten films in ten different genres. Titanic ranked as the sixth best epic film.

Home media[edit]
Titanic was released worldwide in widescreen and pan and scan formats on VHS and laserdisc on September 1, 1998.[153] Both VHS formats were also made available in a deluxe boxed gift set with a mounted filmstrip and six lithograph prints from the movie. A DVD version was released on August 31, 1999 in a widescreen-only (non-anamorphic) single-disc edition with no special features other than a theatrical trailer. Cameron stated at the time that he intended to release a special edition with extra features later. This release became the best-selling DVD of 1999 and early 2000, becoming the first DVD ever to sell one million copies.[154] At the time, fewer than 5% of all U.S. homes had a DVD player. "When we released the original Titanic DVD, the industry was much smaller, and bonus features were not the standard they are now," said Meagan Burrows, Paramount's president of domestic home entertainment, which made the film's DVD performance even more impressive.[154]
Titanic was re-released to DVD on October 25, 2005 when a three-disc Special Collector's Edition was made available in the United States and Canada. This edition contained a newly restored transfer of the film, as well as various special features. The two-disc edition was marketed as the Special Edition, and featured the first two discs of the three-disc set, only PAL-enabled. A four-disc edition, marketed as the Deluxe Collector's Edition, was also released on November 7, 2005. Available only in the United Kingdom, a limited 5-disc set of the film, under the title Deluxe Limited Edition, was released with only 10,000 copies manufactured. The fifth disc contains Cameron's documentary Ghosts of the Abyss, which was distributed by Walt Disney Pictures. Unlike the individual release of Ghosts of the Abyss, which contained two discs, only the first disc was included in the set.[97] In 2007, for the film's tenth anniversary, a 10th Anniversary Edition was released on DVD, which consists of the first two discs from the three-disc 2005 set containing the movie and the special features on those discs.[155]
Titanic was released on Blu-ray as a single disc variant and a 2 disc version featuring special features on September 10, 2012.[156] A 4 Disc Blu-ray 3D version was released the same day.[157][158] A limited Collector's Edition box set including the Blu-ray 3D, 2D Blu-ray, DVD, a digital copy and a variety of souvenirs was also released exclusively to Amazon.com and other international retailers.[159]
With regard to television broadcasts, the film airs occasionally across the United States on networks such as TNT.[160] To permit the scene where Jack draws the nude portrait of Rose to be shown on network and specialty cable channels, in addition to minor cuts, the sheer, see-through robe worn by Winslet was digitally painted black. Turner Classic Movies also began to show the film, specifically during the days leading up to the 82nd Academy Awards.[161]

3D conversion[edit]
A 2012 3D re-release was created by re-mastering the original to 4K resolution and post-converting to stereoscopic 3D format. The Titanic 3D version took 60 weeks and $18 million to produce, including the 4K restoration.[162]  The 3D conversion was performed by Stereo D[163] and Sony with Slam Content's Panther Records remastering the soundtrack.[164] Digital 2D and in 2D IMAX versions were also struck from the new 4K master created in the process.[165] For the 3D release, Cameron opened up the Super 35 film and expanded the image of the film into a new aspect ratio, from 2:35:1 to 1:78:1, allowing the viewer to see more image on the top and bottom of the screen.[166] The only scene entirely redone for the re-release was Rose's view of the night sky at sea, on the morning of April 15, 1912. The scene was replaced with an accurate view of the night-sky star pattern, including the Milky Way, adjusted for the location in the North Atlantic Ocean in April 1912. The change was prompted by astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, who had criticized the scene for showing an unrealistic star pattern. He agreed to send film director Cameron a corrected view of the sky, which was the basis of the new scene.[167]

  An accurate view of the Milky Way was used to replace Rose's view of the moonless night sky at sea, as in this photo from Paranal Observatory. The view was adjusted to match the North Atlantic at 4:20 am on April 15, 1912.
The 3D version of Titanic premiered at the Royal Albert Hall in London on March 27, 2012, with James Cameron and Kate Winslet in attendance,[168][169] and entered general release on April 4, 2012, six days shy of the centenary of RMS Titanic embarking on her maiden voyage.[170][171][172]
Rolling Stone film critic Peter Travers rated the reissue 3½ stars out of 4, explaining he found it "pretty damn dazzling". He said, "The 3D intensifies Titanic. You are there. Caught up like never before in an intimate epic that earns its place in the movie time capsule."[173] Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Owen Gleiberman gave the film an A grade. He wrote, "For once, the visuals in a 3-D movie don't look darkened or distracting. They look sensationally crisp and alive."[174] Richard Corliss of Time who was very critical in 1997 remained in the same mood, "I had pretty much the same reaction: fitfully awed, mostly water-logged." In regards to the 3D effects, he noted the "careful conversion to 3D lends volume and impact to certain moments ... [but] in separating the foreground and background of each scene, the converters have carved the visual field into discrete, not organic, levels."[175] Ann Hornaday for The Washington Post found herself asking "whether the film's twin values of humanism and spectacle are enhanced by Cameron's 3-D conversion, and the answer to that is: They aren't." She further added that the "3-D conversion creates distance where there should be intimacy, not to mention odd moments in framing and composition."[176]
The film grossed an estimated $4.7 million on the first day of its re-release in North America (including midnight preview showings) and went on to make $17.3 million over the weekend, finishing in third place.[177][178] Outside North America it earned $35.2 million finishing second,[179] and improved on its performance the following weekend by topping the box office with $98.9 million.[180] China has proven to be its most successful territory where it earned $11.6 million on its opening day,[181] going on to earn a record-breaking $67 million in its opening week and taking more money in the process than it did in the entirety of its original theatrical run.[180] The reissue ultimately earned $343.4 million worldwide, with $145 million coming from China and $57.8 million from Canada and United States.[182]
The 3D conversion of the film was also released in the 4DX format in selected international territories, which allows the audience to experience the film's environment using motion, wind, fog, lighting and scent-based special effects.[183][184][185]
For the 20th anniversary of the film, Titanic was re-released in cinemas in Dolby Vision (in both 2D and 3D) for one week beginning December 1, 2017.[186]

Titanic Live[edit]
Titanic Live was a live performance of James Horner's original score by a 130-piece orchestra, choir and Celtic musicians, accompanying a showing of the film.[187] In April 2015, Titanic Live premiered at the Royal Albert Hall, London, where the 2012 3D re-release had premiered.[188] The Express said it was "An absolute triumph, Titanic Live brought the film to life in a beautiful new way."[189]

See also[edit]
List of Academy Award records
Notes[edit]


^ Although the Titanic hit the iceberg on April 14, it did not sink until the following day.


References[edit]


^ a b c "Titanic (1997)". Film & TV Database. British Film Institute. Retrieved July 29, 2011..mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right .1em center}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

^ a b "Titanic". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. American Film Institute. Retrieved February 2, 2018.

^ "TITANIC (12)". British Board of Film Classification. November 14, 1997. Retrieved November 8, 2014.

^ a b Garrett, Diane (April 20, 2007). "Big-budget bang-ups". Variety. Archived from the original on November 17, 2009. Retrieved November 16, 2009.

^ a b Wyatt, Justin; Vlesmas, Katherine (1999). "The Drama of Recoupment: On the Mass Media Negotiation of Titanic": 29–45. In Sandler & Studlar (1999).

^ a b Welkos, Robert W. (February 11, 1998). "The $200-Million Lesson of 'Titanic'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 12, 2009. Retrieved December 12, 2009.

^ a b "Titanic (1997)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 8, 2012.

^ Carlson, Dusten (September 14, 2012). "James Cameron And MythBusters Prove That Jack Had To Die". Inquisitr. Retrieved July 17, 2016.

^ a b James Cameron (2005). Audio Commentary (DVD). 20th Century Fox. The big ambiguity here is 'is she alive and dreaming' or 'is she dead and on her way to Titanic heaven?' I'll never tell. Of course, I know what we intended ... The answer has to be something you supply personally; individually.

^ a b c d "Heart of the Ocean: The Making of Titanic. THE BEST OF". 1997–1998.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m "Titanic. Man overboard! After a production as lavish and pricey as the doomed ship itself, James Cameron finally unveils his epic film. But will it be unsinkable?". Entertainment Weekly. November 7, 1997. pp. 1–7. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r "James Cameron's Titanic". Media Awareness Network. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011. Retrieved January 24, 2010.

^ "Billy Crudup: "Titanic" Would've Sunk My Life". Internet Movie Database. June 22, 2000. Retrieved June 14, 2007.

^ "Actor Is Thankful He Didn't Get Titanic Role". Internet Movie Database. August 25, 1998. Archived from the original on March 18, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2007.

^ "Leonardo DiCaprio or Kate Winslet: Which 'Titanic' Star Has the Better Career?". The Daily Beast. The Newsweek Daily Beast Company. April 4, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2012.

^ "Titanic: Visiting The Grave Of The Real J. Dawson In Halifax". Huffington Post. April 4, 2012. Archived from the original on April 7, 2012. Retrieved May 12, 2015.

^ "Star Misses. Nicole Kidman in "The Reader"? Gwyneth Paltrow aboard "Titanic"? How some of the biggest names in Hollywood lost out on some of its biggest roles". Forbes. February 25, 2009. Retrieved January 22, 2010.

^ "'Titanic' Casting: What Other Stars Were Considered For James Cameron's Masterpiece?". Huffington Post. June 22, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2016.

^ Warrington, Ruby (November 29, 2009). "Claire Danes: the secretive starlet". The Times. London. Retrieved January 22, 2010.

^ "Why Rob Lowe Left Brothers & Sisters & The West Wing". E! Online. Retrieved July 23, 2017.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Schultz, Rick. "James Cameron tells the astonishing story of Titanic, his breathtaking labor of love". industrycentral.net. Retrieved January 23, 2010.

^ "'Titanic' star Gloria Stuart dies". Variety. September 27, 2010. Retrieved May 9, 2014.

^ "Five Titanic myths spread by films". BBC News. April 4, 2012.

^ Barczewski, Stephanie L. (2004). Titanic: A Night Remembered. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-85285-434-8. Retrieved March 31, 2009.

^ a b c ON A SEA OF GLASS: THE LIFE & LOSS OF THE RMS TITANIC" by Tad Fitch, J. Kent Layton & Bill Wormstedt. Amberley Books, March 2012. pp 321-323

^ Ballard, pp. 40–41

^ Beesley, Lawrence (1912). The Loss of the S.S. Titanic. London: Heinemann. p. 56.

^ Howells (1999: 31).

^ Jack, Ian (September 26, 1999). "Further, my god, from thee". The Independent. London. Retrieved April 16, 2012.

^ Marshall, Bevil, J (October 1999). "And the Band Played On". Southwest Regional Chapter of the American Musicological Society, Rice University. Houston. Retrieved February 23, 2012.

^ "Nephew angered by tarnishing of Titanic hero". BBC News. January 24, 1998. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ "Titanic makers say sorry". BBC News. April 15, 1998. Retrieved February 22, 2007.

^ James Cameron (2005). Audio Commentary (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ James Cameron's Titanic, p. 129.

^ British Wreck Commissioner's Enquiry: Report. "Account of the Saving and Rescue of those who Survived: Conduct of Sir Cosmo Duff Gordon and Mr Ismay". Retrieved 8/23/12 at: "British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry Report". Archived from the original on January 3, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014.

^ Reynolds, Nigel (May 2, 2007). "Letter clears 'blackguard of the Titanic'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on July 16, 2007. Retrieved May 5, 2007.

^ Lynch, pp. 183–185

^ "Sir Cosmo and Lady Duff Gordon at the Titanic Inquiry," The Sketch, May 22, 1912

^ "Conduct of Sir Cosmo-Duff Gordon and Mr. Ismay". Titanic Inquiry Project. Retrieved January 2, 2006.

^ "British Wreck Commissioner's Inquiry: Day 6". Titanic Inquiry Project. 1999. Retrieved August 3, 2010.

^ a b c d e f Ed W. Marsh (1998). James Cameron's Titanic. London: Boxtree. pp. 3–29.

^ Marcus, Jon (April 8, 2012). "A Titanic Obsession". Boston Globe. Retrieved May 11, 2014.

^ Anders Falk (2005). Titanic Ship's Tour (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ a b c d e f Marsh and Kirkland, pp. v–xiii

^ a b "James Cameron: Playboy Interview". Playboy. December 2009. Archived from the original on July 30, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ a b c d e f Realf, Maria. "An audience with James Cameron. The filmmaker discusses his movies to date and reveals the motivations". Eyeforfilm.co.uk. Retrieved January 21, 2010.

^ a b Bilmes, Alex (December 14, 2009). "James Cameron is a genial raconteur and self-effacing man, says Alex Bilmes". GQ. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved May 9, 2014.

^ a b c James Cameron (2005). Deep Dive Presentation (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ Eaton, John P.; Haas, Charles A. (1999). Titanic: A Journey Through Time. Sparkford, Somerset: Patrick Stephens. p. 205. ISBN 978-1-85260-575-9.

^ a b Jon Landau, Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart, Victor Garber (2005). Audio Commentary (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ Beverly Fortune (October 11, 1999). "Wheel of Fortune". Lexington Herald-Leader. That was one of the first questions pitched to 89-year-old actress Gloria Stuart at a book signing Wednesday night at Joseph-Beth Booksellers [...] 'Yes, Old Rose died.'

^ a b c Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 36–38

^ Ed W. Marsh (1997). James Cameron's Titanic. p. 21.

^ Ed W. Marsh (1997). James Cameron's Titanic. p. 35.

^ a b Ed W. Marsh (2005). Construction Timelapse (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 130–142

^ Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 52–54

^ "Quite a bit of the dialogue is peppered by vulgarities and colloquialisms that seem inappropriate to the period and place, but again seem aimed directly to the sensibilities of young American viewers." McCarthy, Todd (November 3, 1997). ""Titanic" review by Todd McCarthy". Variety. Retrieved February 21, 2009.

^ "Titanic's very slow leak". The Washington Post. March 25, 1999. Retrieved February 21, 2009.

^ "Topless drawing of Kate Winslet in Titanic to sell for £10,000". The Telegraph. April 1, 2011. Retrieved October 28, 2018.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Godwin, Christopher (November 8, 2008). "James Cameron: From Titanic to Avatar". The Times. London. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2010.

^ a b "PCP-laced chowder derails Titanic filming". Entertainment Weekly. September 13, 1996. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ a b c d Andrew Gumbel (January 11, 2007). "Lights, cameras, blockbuster: The return of James Cameron". The Independent. London. Retrieved February 5, 2008.

^ "Leonardo DiCaprio Interviewed by Joe Leydon for "Titanic"". YouTube. June 11, 2008. Retrieved August 3, 2010.

^ Marshall, Sarah (December 17, 2017). "The Insane True Story Of How "Titanic" Got Made". BuzzFeed. Retrieved December 27, 2017.

^ a b Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 147–154

^ Marsh and Kirkland, p. 65

^ VFX Shot Breakdown (DVD). 20th Century Fox. 2005.

^ VFX How To For First Class Lounge (DVD). 20th Century Fox. 2005.

^ VFX How To Flood A First Class Corridor (DVD). 20th Century Fox. 2005.

^ Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 161–168

^ James Cameron (2005). Alternate Ending Commentary (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ Lerner, Will (February 27, 2017). "Bill Paxton on the Alternate Ending of 'Titanic' That Audiences Didn't See in 1997". Yahoo! Entertainment. Retrieved September 23, 2018.

^ a b James Cameron (2005). Deleted scene commentaries (DVD). 20th Century Fox.

^ Hitchner, Earle (March 12, 1998). "In Titanic's Wake: A Voice to Remember . ." The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 8, 2010.

^ a b Parisi, p. 195

^ Weinraub, Bernard (April 21, 1997). "Hollywood Braces for Likely Delay Of 'Titanic'". The New York Times. Retrieved February 8, 2014.

^ "Big in Japan: 'Titanics premiere". Entertainment Weekly. November 14, 1997. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ Strom, Stephanie (November 4, 1997). "Arts Abroad; Harrison Ford's Not in 'Titanic'? Well, No Matter!". The New York Times. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ a b "Cameron does it again as 'Avatar' surpasses 'Titanic'". Newsday. February 3, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2010.

^ Titanic and the Making of James Cameron: The Inside Story of the Three-Year ... - Paula Parisi - Google Books

^ "Titanic sinks competitors without a trace". BBC News. February 25, 1998. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ "Titanic becomes second ever film to take $2 billion". The Daily Telegraph. London. April 16, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2012.

^ "All Time Box Office Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 16, 2018.

^ "Titanic (1997)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 31, 2016.

^ Burns, John F. (April 28, 1998). "Why 'Titanic' Conquered the World; New Delhi". New York Times. Retrieved May 20, 2018.

^ Sharma, Sanjukta (December 24, 2017). "To Titanic, the most Bollywood Hollywood movie ever made". Hindustan Times. Retrieved May 20, 2018.

^ "Titanic (1997) – Daily Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "Titanic (1997) – Weekend Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "BEST RANKING MOVIES by Weekend Rank, 1982–Present". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "Titanic (1997) – Release Summary". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Community Development Project. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Retrieved January 2, 2019.

^ "Titanic (1997) – Overseas Total". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "The Billion Dollar film club". The Daily Telegraph. London. August 1, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2012.

^ a b c Davis, Jason (March 24, 1998). "Love story that won the heart of the Academy: The love story that stole the world's hearts". BBC News. Retrieved September 11, 2007.

^ a b c d Thomson, David (December 10, 2007). "Titanic achievement at the box office". The Guardian. London. Retrieved January 8, 2010.

^ a b c Willcock, Benjamin. "Benjamin Willcock takes a look at the long-awaited special edition of Titanic". dvdactive.com. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ a b c Ditzian, Eric (January 4, 2010). "Will 'Avatar' Top James Cameron's 'Titanic' Box-Office Record?". MTV. Retrieved January 8, 2010.

^ Busch, Anita M. (March 6, 1998). "Was Leonardo Robbed?". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 23, 2013.

^ O'Neill, Anne-Marie (January 26, 1998). "Riding the Wave". People. Retrieved January 8, 2010.

^ a b "Titanic (1997)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved December 7, 2006.

^ a b c Hodder, Ian (March 6, 2007). "Sniff, sniff ... 7 movies that make guys cry". MSNBC. Retrieved January 8, 2010.

^ a b c Rohrer, Finlo (July 16, 2010). "A new type of tear-jerker". BBC News. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Over the years misty eyes have been generated by the death of Bambi's mother, the killing of the kestrel in Kes, the ending of Titanic, or Jenny's death in Love Story.

^ a b Meslow, Scott (April 6, 2012). "Boys Can Love 'Titanic,' Too". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 22, 2015.

^ Loder, Kurt (October 2, 2009). "Woody Harrelson brings the laughs in a high-spirited monster mow-down". MTV. Retrieved December 6, 2010.

^ a b "AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ a b Pawlowski, A (March 9, 2009). "You talkin' to me? Film quotes stir passion". CNN. Retrieved January 21, 2010.

^ Carroll, Jason (November 23, 2009). "CNN's Jason Carroll interviews director James Cameron about his new film "Avatar." (Video.)". CNN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2009. Retrieved December 20, 2009.

^ Levin, Josh (December 10, 2009). "Here Come the Cats With Human Boobs. Is Avatar destined to flop?". Slate. Retrieved December 20, 2009.

^ a b Britt, Russ (January 4, 2010). "Can Cameron break his own box-office record? 'Avatar' unprecedented in staying power, international sales". MarketWatch. Retrieved January 4, 2010.

^ a b Jacks, Brian (January 16, 2010). "EXCLUSIVE: James Cameron Says 'Avatar' Will Beat 'Titanic' To Become Biggest Of All Time". MTV. Retrieved January 17, 2010.

^ Ball, Sarah (January 6, 2010). "How 'Avatar' Can Beat 'Titanic'". Newsweek. Retrieved January 9, 2010.

^ a b Alexandra Keller (2014). James Cameron. Routledge. pp. 73–76. ISBN 1134700210. Retrieved October 25, 2014.

^ Robert A. Rosenstone (2007). Lights, Camera, History: Portraying the Past in Film. Texas A&M University Press. pp. 115–117. ISBN 160344503X. Retrieved October 25, 2014.

^ a b David S. Kidder, Noah D. Oppenheim (2008). The Intellectual Devotional Modern Culture: Revive Your Mind, Complete Your Education, and Converse Confidently with the Culturati. Rodale, Inc. p. 361. ISBN 1605297933. Retrieved October 25, 2014.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link)

^ "Titanic reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved December 7, 2006.

^ "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com.

^ Roger Ebert (December 19, 1997). "Titanic Movie Review & Film Summary (1997) | Roger Ebert". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved December 7, 2006.

^ DuPree, Don (director). "Best of 97" (January 3, 1998). Television: Siskel & Ebert. Burbank: Buena Vista Television.  Video on YouTube

^ "Siskel and Ebert Titanic (1997) Review". At the Movies. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ Berardinelli, James. "A Film Review by James Berardinelli". Reelviews.net. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ Berardinelli, James. "James Berardinelli Top 10 of 1997". Reelviews.net. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ Almar Haflidason (August 2007). "Titanic (1997)". BBC. Retrieved December 26, 2008.

^ a b c "Titanic (1997) Critical Debates". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2013. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ Giles, Jeff (December 16, 2009). "Total Recall: James Cameron Movies. We take a look at the career of the visionary director of Avatar". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ Corliss, Richard (December 8, 1997). "Down, Down To A Watery Grave". Time. Retrieved July 22, 2008.

^ Kenneth Turan (December 19, 1997). "Titanic". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ Lubin, pp. 8–9

^ Barbara Shulgasser (December 19, 1997). "Talk about disasters". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ Roger Friedman (March 23, 2002). "Altman: Titanic Worst Movie Ever". Fox News Channel. Retrieved December 2, 2008.

^ Davenport-Hines, Richard (2012). Titanic Lives: Migrants and Millionaires, Conmen and Crew. UK: HarperCollins.

^ "Titanic voted 'best' film ending". BBC News. October 15, 2003. Retrieved June 15, 2007.

^ "Titanic sinks in worst film poll". BBC News. November 5, 2003. Retrieved June 15, 2007.

^ Stephenson, John-Paul (October 2005). "Reviewing Symbolic Capital". M/C Journal: A Journal of Media and Culture. 8 (5). Retrieved September 11, 2009.

^ "Clash of the Titanic". Retrieved October 14, 2007.

^ "He's Mad as Hell at Turan. James Cameron Gets the Last Word on Our Critic's 'Titanic'". Los Angeles Times. March 28, 1998. Retrieved February 22, 2010.

^ Adam Smith. "Review of Titanic". Bauer Consumer Media. Retrieved August 20, 2010.

^ "2017 National Film Registry Is More Than a 'Field of Dreams'". The Library of Congress. Retrieved December 13, 2017.

^ "Titanic sweeps Golden Globes". BBC News. January 19, 1998. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ "Nominations for the 55th Golden Globe Awards". BBC. January 17, 1998. Retrieved February 19, 2007.

^ a b c d e f g h "Titanic Awards and Nominations". Internet Movie Database. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "Can Anything Stop the Raising of Titanic on March 23?". The New York Observer. February 22, 1998. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2010.

^ "The 70th Academy Awards (1998) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Retrieved November 19, 2011.

^ "Past Winners Search - 1998 - 41st Annual Grammy Awards". The Recording Academy. Retrieved February 10, 2014.

^ "41st Annual GRAMMY Awards". The Recording Academy. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ "Gold & Platinum – July 28, 2009". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved July 28, 2009.

^ "The Billboard 200: 1998". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 8, 2008.

^ "AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 19, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "AFI's official PDF of the 1998 and 2007 rankings (registration required)" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ "AFI's Top Ten Epic" (PDF). American Film Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 16, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ Titanic [VHS] (1997). ISBN 0-7921-5171-2

^ a b Arnold, Thomas K (March 28, 2005). "Special editions go full steam ahead". USA Today. Retrieved January 19, 2010.

^ https://www.dvdtalk.com/reviews/31834/titanic-10th-anniversary-edition/

^ Titanic, Imports, September 17, 2013, retrieved August 14, 2016

^ Cameron, James (September 10, 2012), Titanic, Paramount, retrieved August 14, 2016

^ "Titanic (1997) - Financial Information".

^ Cameron, James (September 10, 2012), Titanic Collector's Edition, Paramount, retrieved August 14, 2016

^ "Titanic". Turner Broadcasting System. Archived from the original on April 17, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2010.

^ "Turner Classic Movies' Annual 31 DAYS OF OSCAR(R) To Go Full Circle with Special 360° Edition in February". Turner Broadcasting System. Retrieved July 10, 2010.

^ "Coming in 60 weeks: 'Titanic' in 3D version". The Times of India. October 30, 2011. Retrieved March 27, 2012.

^ "Inside the 3-D Conversion of 'Titanic'". The New York Times. March 30, 2012.

^ "Slam Content - crunchbase". www.crunchbase.com. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012.

^ Douglas, Edward (October 12, 2011). "A Preview of James Cameron's Titanic 3D Rerelease". ComingSoon.net (CraveOnline). Retrieved November 18, 2011.

^ Liebman, Martin (September 4, 2012). "Titanic 3D Blu-ray Review: A classic film earns a stunning 3D conversion". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved April 22, 2014.

^ O'Neill, Ian (April 2, 2012). "'Titanic' Accuracy Tightened by Neil deGrassee Tyson". Discovery News. Retrieved April 12, 2012.

^ "Titanic: Kate Winslet and James Cameron at 3D premiere". BBC News. March 28, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ "Kate Winslet, James Cameron at Titanic 3D premiere". Yahoo! News. March 27, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2014.

^ "Titanic Official Movie Site". Paramount Pictures. Retrieved February 7, 2012.

^ Semigran, Ali (February 8, 2012). "'Titanic' in 3-D to set sail two days earlier". Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ "Paramount Pictures, Twentieth Century Fox and Lightstorm Entertainment to Set Sail Again with James Cameron's Oscar-Winning "Titanic" with a Worldwide 3D Re-release on April 6, 2012" (Press release). Paramount Pictures. May 19, 2011. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2011.

^ Travers, Peter (April 5, 2012). "Movie Reviews - Titanic 3D". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ Gleiberman, Owen (April 4, 2012). "Titanic 3D Review". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ Corliss, Richard (April 4, 2012). "Titanic, TIME and Me". Time. Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ Hornaday, Ann (April 4, 2012). "'Titanic 3-D' review". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ Young, John (April 5, 2012). "'Titanic 3D' leaves port with $4.4 million on Wednesday, so was the 3-D conversion worth it?". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 8, 2012.

^ Subers, Ray (April 8, 2012). "Weekend Report: 'Hunger Games' Three-peats, Passes $300 Million Over Easter". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ Subers, Ray (April 10, 2012). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Titanic 3D' Can't Stop 'Wrath'". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ a b "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Titanic 3D' Opens to Record-Setting $67 Million in China". Box Office Mojo. April 16, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2012.

^ Subers, Ray (April 10, 2012). "'Titanic 3D' Has Huge Opening Day in China". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "Titanic 3D (2012) – International Box Office results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 23, 2012.

^ Gilchrist, Todd (April 4, 2012). "'Titanic' Fans Get to Go Down with the Ship in '4DX' - The Hollywood Reporter". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 28, 2013.

^ Keegan, Rebecca (April 4, 2012). "'Titanic 4DX': Foreign audiences to smell, feel ship's sinking". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 28, 2013.

^ "TITANIC to be Re-released in 4DX™" (Press release). PR Newswire. April 3, 2012. Retrieved October 28, 2013.

^ Evans, Greg (November 15, 2017). "James Cameron's 'Titanic' Floats Again In 2D & 3D December Rerelease". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 18, 2017.

^ "Titanic Live - The Event - Titanic Live".

^ "Titanic Live sets sail for the Royal Albert Hall - Entertainment Focus". www.entertainment-focus.com.

^ Britt, Hannah (April 29, 2015). "Review: Titanic Live brings the famous film to life at The Royal Albert Hall".


Further reading[edit]
.mw-parser-output .refbegin{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul{list-style-type:none;margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>ul>li,.mw-parser-output .refbegin-hanging-indents>dl>dd{margin-left:0;padding-left:3.2em;text-indent:-3.2em;list-style:none}.mw-parser-output .refbegin-100{font-size:100%}
Frakes, Randall (1998). Titanic: James Cameron's Illustrated Screenplay. New York: Harper. ISBN 0-06-095307-1.
Cameron, Stephen (1998). Titanic: Belfast's Own. Ireland: Wolfhound Press. ISBN 0-86327-685-7.
Mireille Majoor; James Cameron (2003). Titanic: Ghosts of the Abyss. New York: Scholastic. ISBN 1-895892-31-7.
Molony, Senan (2005). Titanic: A Primary Source History. Canada: Gareth Stevens. ISBN 0-8368-5980-4.
Marsh, Ed W.; Kirkland, Douglas (1998). James Cameron's Titanic. London: Boxtree. ISBN 0-7522-2404-2.
Parisi, Paula (1998). Titanic and the Making of James Cameron. London: Orion. ISBN 0-7528-1799-X.
Sandler, Kevin S.; Studlar, Gaylyn, eds. (1999). Titanic: Anatomy of a Blockbuster. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-2669-0.
Ballard, Robert (1987). The Discovery of the Titanic. Canada: Grand Central Publishing. ISBN 0-446-67174-6.
Lynch, Donald (1992). Titanic: An Illustrated History. New York: Madison Press Books. ISBN 978-0-7868-6401-0.
Lubin, David M. (1999). "Titanic" (BFI Modern Classics). London: BFI Publishing. ISBN 0-85170-760-2.

External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Titanic (1997 film).



Wikiquote has quotations related to: Titanic (1997 film)
Official website
Titanic on IMDb 
Titanic at the TCM Movie Database
Titanic at AllMovie
Titanic at Rotten Tomatoes
Titanic at Metacritic
Titanic at Box Office Mojo
Titanic at The Numbers
Screenplay of Titanic at imsdb.com/scripts
vteRMS Titanic
First class facilities
Second and Third class facilities
Grand Staircase
Musicians
Sinking
Alternative theories
Changes in safety practices
Legends and myths
Lifeboats
Lifeboat No. 1
British inquiry
US inquiry
Wreck of Titanic
Maritime Memorial Act
Deck officers
Edward J. Smith (Captain)
Henry Tingle Wilde (Chief Officer)
William McMaster Murdoch (First Officer)
Charles H. Lightoller (Second Officer)
Herbert Pitman (Third Officer)
Joseph G. Boxhall (Fourth Officer)
Harold G. Lowe (Fifth Officer)
James Paul Moody (Sixth Officer)
Joseph Bell (Machine Room Manager)
Crew members
Frederick Barrett
Harold Bride
William Denton Cox
Sid Daniels
Frederick Fleet
Luigi Gatti
Robert Hichens
Violet Jessop
Charles Joughin
Reginald Lee
Evelyn Marsden
William Mintram
Jack Phillips
George Symons
PassengersFatalities
Allison family
Thomas Andrews
John Jacob Astor IV
David John Bowen
Archibald Butt
Thomas Byles
Roderick Chisholm
Walter Donald Douglas
Annie Funk
Jacques Futrelle
Sidney Leslie Goodwin
Benjamin Guggenheim
John Harper
Wallace Hartley
Charles Melville Hays
Edward Austin Kent
Joseph Philippe Lemercier Laroche
Francis Davis Millet
Harry Markland Molson
Clarence Moore
Eino Viljami Panula
W. T. Stead
Ida Straus
Isidor Straus
John Borland Thayer Jr.
Frank M. Warren, Sr.
George Dennick Wick
George Dunton Widener
Harry Elkins Widener
Duane Williams
George Henry Wright
Survivors(last living)
Rhoda Abbott
Trevor Allison
Lillian Asplund
Madeleine Astor
Ruth Becker
Lawrence Beesley
Karl Behr
Dickinson Bishop
Mauritz Håkan Björnström-Steffansson
Elsie Bowerman
Francis Browne
Margaret "Molly" Brown
Daniel Buckley
Helen Churchill Candee
Charlotte Drake Cardeza
Lucile Carter
Gladys Cherry
Millvina Dean
Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon
Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon
Dorothy Gibson
Archibald Gracie IV
Frank John William Goldsmith
Edith Haisman
Henry S. Harper
Eva Hart
Margaret Bechstein Hays
Masabumi Hosono
J. Bruce Ismay
Eleanor Ileen Johnson
Louise Laroche
Louise Kink
Margaret Mannion
Michel Marcel Navratil
Alfred Nourney
Arthur Godfrey Peuchen
Winnifred Quick
Edith Rosenbaum
Noël Leslie, Countess of Rothes
Emily Ryerson
Beatrice Sandström
Frederic Kimber Seward
Eloise Hughes Smith
Jack Thayer
Marian Thayer
Barbara West
Ella Holmes White
R. Norris Williams
Marie Grice Young
Monumentsand memorialsGeneral
Memorials and monuments to the RMS Titanic
Australia
Bandstand (Ballarat)
United Kingdom
Engine Room Heroes (Liverpool)
Engineers (Southampton)
Musicians (Southampton)
Titanic (Belfast)
Orchestra (Liverpool)
United States
Straus Park (New York City)
Titanic (New York City)
Titanic (Washington, D.C.)
Butt-Millet Memorial Fountain (Washington, D.C.)
Popular culture(cultural legacy)Books
The Wreck of the Titan: Or, Futility (1898)
A Night to Remember (book)
Polar the Titanic Bear
Films
Saved from the Titanic (1912)
In Nacht und Eis (1912)
Atlantic (1929)
Titanic (1943)
Titanic (1953)
A Night to Remember (1958)
The Unsinkable Molly Brown (1964)
Raise the Titanic (1980)
Secrets of the Titanic (1986)
Titanica (1992)
Titanic (1997)
The Legend of the Titanic (1999)
Titanic: The Legend Goes On (2000)
Ghosts of the Abyss (2003)
Tentacolino (2004)
Titanic II (2010)
Television
S.O.S. Titanic (1979)
Titanic: The Complete Story (1994)
Titanic (1996)
 No Greater Love (1996)
"A Flight to Remember" (Futurama) (1999)
Titanic (2012)
Titanic: Blood and Steel (2012)
Saving the Titanic (2012)
Music
"The Titanic (It Was Sad When That Great Ship Went Down)" (folk song)
The Sinking of the Titanic (music composition)
Titanic (musical)
The Unsinkable Molly Brown (musical)
"My Heart Will Go On" (Celine Dion song)
"Nearer, My God, to Thee" (song)
Video games
Titanic: Adventure Out of Time (1996)
Dive to the Titanic (2010)
Titanic VR (2018)
Titanic: Honor and Glory (TBA)
Museumsand exhibitions
SeaCity Museum (Southampton)
Titanic Museum (Branson, Missouri)
Titanic Museum (Pigeon Forge, Tennessee)
Maritime Museum of the Atlantic (Halifax)
Titanic Belfast
Places
Titanic (Canada)
Titanic Canyon
Titanic Quarter, Belfast
Cape Race, Newfoundland
Fairview Cemetery, Halifax, Nova Scotia
Mount Olivet Cemetery (Halifax)
RelatedShips
RMS Olympic
RMS Carpathia
HMHS Britannic
CS Mackay-Bennett
SS Californian
Replica Titanic
Titanic II
Others
White Star Line
David Blair
Arthur Rostron
Stanley Lord
Titanic Historical Society
Encyclopedia Titanica
Halomonas titanicae
Women and children first
SOS
CQD
Robert Ballard
La Circassienne au Bain

 Category
 Commons

vteJames CameronFilmographyFilms directedFeature
Piranha II: The Spawning (1982)
The Terminator (1984)
Aliens (1986)
The Abyss (1989)
Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)
True Lies (1994)
Titanic (1997)
Avatar (2009)
Avatar 2 (2020)
Avatar 3 (2021)
Short
Xenogenesis (1978)
T2-3D: Battle Across Time (1996)
Documentaries
Expedition: Bismarck (2002)
Ghosts of the Abyss (2003)
Aliens of the Deep (2005)
Written only
Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985)
Strange Days (1995)
Alita: Battle Angel (2019)
Produced only
Strange Days (1995)
Solaris (2002)
Alita: Battle Angel (2019)
Terminator: Dark Fate (2019)
Related articles
Lightstorm Entertainment
Dark Angel
Deepsea Challenger
Pristimantis jamescameroni

Awards for Titanic
vteAcademy Award for Best Picture1927/28–1950
Wings (1927/28)
The Broadway Melody (1928/29)
All Quiet on the Western Front (1929/30)
Cimarron (1930/31)
Grand Hotel (1931/32)
Cavalcade (1932/33)
It Happened One Night (1934)
Mutiny on the Bounty (1935)
The Great Ziegfeld (1936)
The Life of Emile Zola (1937)
You Can't Take It with You (1938)
Gone with the Wind (1939)
Rebecca (1940)
How Green Was My Valley (1941)
Mrs. Miniver (1942)
Casablanca (1943)
Going My Way (1944)
The Lost Weekend (1945)
The Best Years of Our Lives (1946)
Gentleman's Agreement (1947)
Hamlet (1948)
All the King's Men (1949)
All About Eve (1950)
1951–1975
An American in Paris (1951)
The Greatest Show on Earth (1952)
From Here to Eternity (1953)
On the Waterfront (1954)
Marty (1955)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956)
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957)
Gigi (1958)
Ben-Hur (1959)
The Apartment (1960)
West Side Story (1961)
Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
Tom Jones (1963)
My Fair Lady (1964)
The Sound of Music (1965)
A Man for All Seasons (1966)
In the Heat of the Night (1967)
Oliver! (1968)
Midnight Cowboy (1969)
Patton (1970)
The French Connection (1971)
The Godfather (1972)
The Sting (1973)
The Godfather Part II (1974)
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
1976–2000
Rocky (1976)
Annie Hall (1977)
The Deer Hunter (1978)
Kramer vs. Kramer (1979)
Ordinary People (1980)
Chariots of Fire (1981)
Gandhi (1982)
Terms of Endearment (1983)
Amadeus (1984)
Out of Africa (1985)
Platoon (1986)
The Last Emperor (1987)
Rain Man (1988)
Driving Miss Daisy (1989)
Dances with Wolves (1990)
The Silence of the Lambs (1991)
Unforgiven (1992)
Schindler's List (1993)
Forrest Gump (1994)
Braveheart (1995)
The English Patient (1996)
Titanic (1997)
Shakespeare in Love (1998)
American Beauty (1999)
Gladiator (2000)
2001–present
A Beautiful Mind (2001)
Chicago (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)
Million Dollar Baby (2004)
Crash (2005)
The Departed (2006)
No Country for Old Men (2007)
Slumdog Millionaire (2008)
The Hurt Locker (2009)
The King's Speech (2010)
The Artist (2011)
Argo (2012)
12 Years a Slave (2013)
Birdman or: (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014)
Spotlight (2015)
Moonlight (2016)
The Shape of Water (2017)
Green Book (2018)
Other
Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans (1927/28) won the Academy Award for Best Unique and Artistic Picture. It was regarded equally as the top award until the award category was discontinued the following year.

vteEmpire Award for Best Film
Braveheart (1996)
Se7en (1997)
Men in Black (1998)
Titanic (1999)
The Matrix (2000)
Gladiator (2001)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004)
The Bourne Supremacy (2005)
King Kong (2006)
Casino Royale (2007)
The Bourne Ultimatum (2008)
The Dark Knight (2009)
Avatar (2010)
Inception (2011)
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 (2012)
Skyfall (2013)
Gravity (2014)
Interstellar (2015)
The Revenant (2016)
Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2018)

vteGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
The Song of Bernadette (1943)
Going My Way (1944)
The Lost Weekend (1945)
The Best Years of Our Lives (1946)
Gentleman's Agreement (1947)
Johnny Belinda / The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (1948)
All the King's Men (1949)
Sunset Boulevard (1950)
A Place in the Sun (1951)
The Greatest Show on Earth (1952)
The Robe (1953)
On the Waterfront (1954)
East of Eden (1955)
Around the World in 80 Days (1956)
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957)
The Defiant Ones (1958)
Ben-Hur (1959)
Spartacus (1960)
The Guns of Navarone (1961)
Lawrence of Arabia (1962)
The Cardinal (1963)
Becket (1964)
Doctor Zhivago (1965)
A Man for All Seasons (1966)
In the Heat of the Night (1967)
The Lion in Winter (1968)
Anne of the Thousand Days (1969)
Love Story (1970)
The French Connection (1971)
The Godfather (1972)
The Exorcist (1973)
Chinatown (1974)
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975)
Rocky (1976)
The Turning Point (1977)
Midnight Express (1978)
Kramer vs. Kramer (1979)
Ordinary People (1980)
On Golden Pond (1981)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982)
Terms of Endearment (1983)
Amadeus (1984)
Out of Africa (1985)
Platoon (1986)
The Last Emperor (1987)
Rain Man (1988)
Born on the Fourth of July (1989)
Dances with Wolves (1990)
Bugsy (1991)
Scent of a Woman (1992)
Schindler's List (1993)
Forrest Gump (1994)
Sense and Sensibility (1995)
The English Patient (1996)
Titanic (1997)
Saving Private Ryan (1998)
American Beauty (1999)
Gladiator (2000)
A Beautiful Mind (2001)
The Hours (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)
The Aviator (2004)
Brokeback Mountain (2005)
Babel (2006)
Atonement (2007)
Slumdog Millionaire (2008)
Avatar (2009)
The Social Network (2010)
The Descendants (2011)
Argo (2012)
12 Years a Slave (2013)
Boyhood (2014)
The Revenant (2015)
Moonlight (2016)
Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri (2017)
Bohemian Rhapsody (2018)

vteGolden Globe Award for Best Original Score1940s
Life with Father – Max Steiner (1947)
The Red Shoes – Brian Easdale (1948)
The Inspector General – Johnny Green (1949)
1950s
Sunset Boulevard – Franz Waxman (1950)
September Affair – Victor Young (1951)
High Noon – Dimitri Tiomkin (1952)
On the Beach – Ernest Gold (1959)
1960s
The Alamo – Dimitri Tiomkin (1960)
The Guns of Navarone – Dimitri Tiomkin (1961)
To Kill a Mockingbird – Elmer Bernstein (1962)
(1963)
The Fall of the Roman Empire – Dimitri Tiomkin (1964)
Doctor Zhivago – Maurice Jarre (1965)
Hawaii – Elmer Bernstein (1966)
Camelot – Frederick Loewe (1967)
The Shoes of the Fisherman – Alex North (1968)
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid – Burt Bacharach (1969)
1970s
Love Story – Francis Lai (1970)
Shaft – Isaac Hayes (1971)
The Godfather – Nino Rota (1972)
Jonathan Livingston Seagull – Neil Diamond (1973)
The Little Prince – Alan Jay Lerner, Frederick Loewe (1974)
Jaws – John Williams (1975)
A Star is Born – Kenneth Ascher, Paul Williams (1976)
Star Wars – John Williams (1977)
Midnight Express – Giorgio Moroder (1978)
Apocalypse Now – Carmine Coppola, Francis Ford Coppola (1979)
1980s
The Stunt Man – Dominic Frontiere (1980)
(1981)
E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial – John Williams (1982)
Flashdance – Giorgio Moroder (1983)
A Passage to India – Maurice Jarre (1984)
Out of Africa – John Barry (1985)
The Mission – Ennio Morricone (1986)
The Last Emperor – David Byrne, Ryuichi Sakamoto, Cong Su (1987)
Gorillas in the Mist – Maurice Jarre (1988)
The Little Mermaid – Alan Menken (1989)
1990s
The Sheltering Sky – Richard Horowitz, Ryuichi Sakamoto (1990)
Beauty and the Beast – Alan Menken (1991)
Aladdin – Alan Menken (1992)
Heaven & Earth – Kitarō (1993)
The Lion King – Hans Zimmer (1994)
A Walk in the Clouds – Maurice Jarre (1995)
The English Patient – Gabriel Yared (1996)
Titanic – James Horner (1997)
The Truman Show – Burkhard Dallwitz, Philip Glass (1998)
1900 – Ennio Morricone (1999)
2000s
Gladiator – Lisa Gerrard, Hans Zimmer (2000)
Moulin Rouge! – Craig Armstrong (2001)
Frida – Elliot Goldenthal (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Howard Shore (2003)
The Aviator – Howard Shore (2004)
Memoirs of a Geisha – John Williams (2005)
The Painted Veil – Alexandre Desplat (2006)
Atonement – Dario Marianelli (2007)
Slumdog Millionaire – A. R. Rahman (2008)
Up – Michael Giacchino (2009)
2010s
The Social Network – Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross (2010)
The Artist – Ludovic Bource (2011)
Life of Pi – Mychael Danna (2012)
All Is Lost – Alex Ebert (2013)
The Theory of Everything – Jóhann Jóhannsson (2014)
The Hateful Eight – Ennio Morricone (2015)
La La Land – Justin Hurwitz (2016)
The Shape of Water – Alexandre Desplat (2017)
First Man - Justin Hurwitz (2018)

vteMTV Movie Award for Movie of the YearBest Movie
Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1992)
A Few Good Men (1993)
Menace II Society (1994)
Pulp Fiction (1995)
Seven (1996)
Scream (1997)
Titanic (1998)
There's Something About Mary (1999)
The Matrix (2000)
Gladiator (2001)
The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004)
Napoleon Dynamite (2005)
Wedding Crashers (2006)
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2007)
Transformers (2008)
Twilight (2009)
The Twilight Saga: New Moon (2010)
The Twilight Saga: Eclipse (2011)
Movie of the Year
The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1 (2012)
The Avengers (2013)
The Hunger Games: Catching Fire (2014)
The Fault in Our Stars (2015)
Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2016)
Beauty and the Beast (2017)
Black Panther (2018)

vteProducers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Driving Miss Daisy (1989)
Dances with Wolves (1990)
The Silence of the Lambs (1991)
The Crying Game (1992)
Schindler's List (1993)
Forrest Gump (1994)
Apollo 13 (1995)
The English Patient (1996)
Titanic (1997)
Saving Private Ryan (1998)
American Beauty (1999)
Gladiator (2000)
Moulin Rouge! (2001)
Chicago (2002)
The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)
The Aviator (2004)
Brokeback Mountain (2005)
Little Miss Sunshine (2006)
No Country for Old Men (2007)
Slumdog Millionaire (2008)
The Hurt Locker (2009)
The King's Speech (2010)
The Artist (2011)
Argo (2012)
12 Years a Slave / Gravity (2013)
Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014)
The Big Short (2015)
La La Land (2016)
The Shape of Water (2017)
Green Book (2018)

vteSatellite Award for Best FilmMusical or Comedy  (1996–2010, 2018-present)
Evita (1996)
As Good as It Gets (1997)
Shakespeare in Love (1998)
Being John Malkovich (1999)
Nurse Betty (2000)
Moulin Rouge! (2001)
My Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002)
Lost in Translation (2003)
Sideways (2004)
Walk the Line (2005)
Dreamgirls (2006)
Juno (2007)
Happy-Go-Lucky (2008)
Nine (2009)
Scott Pilgrim vs. the World (2010)
A Star Is Born (2018)
Motion Picture Drama  (1996–2009, 2018-present)
Fargo (1996)
Titanic (1997)
The Thin Red Line (1998)
The Insider (1999)
Traffic (2000)
In the Bedroom (2001)
Far from Heaven (2002)
In America (2003)
Hotel Rwanda (2004)
Brokeback Mountain (2005)
The Departed (2006)
No Country for Old Men (2007)
Slumdog Millionaire (2008)
The Hurt Locker (2009)
If Beale Street Could Talk (2018)
Motion Picture  (2010–2017, retired)
The Social Network (2010)
The Descendants (2011)
Silver Linings Playbook (2012)
12 Years a Slave (2013)
Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014)
Spotlight (2015)
La La Land / Manchester by the Sea (2016)
God's Own Country / Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri (2017)



Film in the United States portal1990s portal
Authority control 
BNE: XX4215298
BNF: cb135090389 (data)
GND: 4499849-1
LCCN: n98012170
NKC: unn2006375306
SUDOC: 050291661
VIAF: 181971987
 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 181971987





